L. MOHOLY-NAGY: 
DYNAMIC OF THE METROPOLIS 
SKETCH FOR A FILM 
ALSO TYPOPHOTO 
The manuscript sketch Dynamic of the Metropolis was written in the year 1921-22. I hoped to carry it 
out with my friend Carl Koch, who gave me many ideas for this work. So far, unfortunately, we have not 
managed to do so; his Film Institute had no money for it. The larger companies like UFA were at that 
time unwilling to risk enterprises which appeared bizarre; other film-people could 'find no action in it 
despite the good idea' and so declined to film it. 
Some years have passed since then and everyone today has some idea of what is meant by the proposition 
-revolutionary in its effect in the early days- of the FILMIC, that is, of the film which proceeds from the 
potentialities of the camera and the dynamics of motion. Such films have been shown in 1924 in Vienna 
by Fernand Leger at the International Festival of Theatre and Music and in Paris- as an entr'acte in the 
Swedish Ballet - by Francis Picabia. Some American comedy films contain similar filmic moments and we 
may say that by now all good film-directors are concerned to establish the optical effect proper to the 
film alone and that the films of today are constructed to a much greater extent upon tempo of movement 
and the contrast of light and shade and the various optical views than on theatrical action. This type of 
film is not concerned with the actor's star-performance, nor indeed with the actor's performance at all. 
We are still, however, at the very beginning. Theoretical deliberations, a few experiments by painters 
and writers which have been based upon their intuitions, chance good fortune during studio work: that 
is all. What we need, however, is an experimental film centre that will work systematically, with the 
most intensive promotion by public authorities. Yesterday a few painters were still experimenting 
on their own. This work was received with suspicion, for the technique of film-production, the whole 
paraphernalia no longer admits of private effort. The 'best' ideas are useless if they cannot be transposed 
into practice and thus form the basis of further development. The setting up of a central film experi­
mental centre t o execute scripts which contain new ideas, even under private, capitalist auspices, will 
therefore soon be an obvious and recognised necessity. 
The intention of the film 'Dynamic of the Metropolis' is not to teach, nor to moralise, nor to tell a story; 
its effect is meant to be visual, purely visual. The elements of the visual have not in this film an absolute 
logical connection with one another; their photographic, visual relationships, nevertheless, make them 
knit together into a vital association of events in space and time and bring the viewer actively into the 
dynamic of the city. 
122 