used in this way in Europe too. Just as today we store the film spools for 
priYate cinematographs in a cupboard in our home. 
It is probable that future development will attach the greatest importance 
to kinetic, projected composition, probably even with interpenetrating 
beams and masses of light floating freely in the room without a direct 
plane of projection; the instruments will continually be improved so that 
it \vill be able to embrace far larger fields of tension than the most highly 
developed static picture. The consequence will be that in future periods 
only the man who actually produces sovereign and uncompromising works 
will be able to become and remain a 'PAINTER'. 
On the other hand, proper handling of reflected (film) and projected com­
position, which will be the dominant mode in the artistic use of colour in 
the future, presupposes a thorough knowledge of optics and its mech­
anical and technical application (as, for example, photography). 
It is a surprising fact that today's painter of 'genius' possesses very little 
scientific knowledge in comparison with the 'unimaginative' technician. 
The technician has already long worked with this knowledge. Thus from 
the field of optics he uses, for example, phenomena of interference and 
polarisation, subtractive and additive blends of light, etc. But that these 
should be used as much as a matter of course in creating coloured dis­
plays seems at present a Utopian idea, despite the fact that the sole argu­
ment levelled against their use is a misunderstood appraisal of the process 
of artistic activity. People believe that they should demand hand execu-: 
tion as an inseparable part of the genesis of a work of art. In fact, in com­
parison with the inventive mental process of the genesis of the work, the 
question of its execution is important only in so far as it must be mastered 
to the limits. The manner, however- whether personal or by assignment 
of labour, whether manual or mechanical - is irrelevant. 
26 