LUDWIG HIRSCHFELD-MACK writes as follows about his SCORE 
of the 'REFLECTED COLOUR DISPLAYS' : 
The reflected colour displays have developed directly from the need to heighten coloured formal planes, 
which in a painted picture merely simulate a movement through their relationships, into an actual, con­
tinuous movement. 
Let us look at paintings by Kandinsky or Klee: all the elements for actual movement - tensions from 
plane to plane to space, rhythm and musical relationships are present in the out-moded painting. It had 
become a necessity actually to move the colour-form planes. A new technique- direct coloured light pro­
jected on to a transparent screen- has enabled us to achieve colours of the most glowing intensity and to 
create movement by having the sources of light freely movable (sideways in all directions and forwards 
and backwards in depth) and by opening and shutting apertures in templets. The coloured light is pro­
jected through these templets, which are placed between the screen and the sources of light, so that the 
colours appear now in angular, sharp, pointed forms, in triangles, squares, polygons, now in rounds, cir­
cles, arches and undulations. By irradiating over the cones of light, which may involve the whole or parts 
of the composition, it is possible to make the light-fields overlap and to effect optical mixtures of colour. 
The working of the apparatus follows an exact SCORE. 
We have been working for three years on the so-called 'reflected colour displays'. The technique we have 
developed has had the advantage of the varied resources of the workshops at the Bauhaus as well as of 
our analysis of the representational means of the film, on which we were engaged even before the colour 
displays were created. I remember the overpowering impression of the first film I saw in Munich in 1912; 
the content of the film was tasteless and left me totally unmoved - only the power of the alternating 
abrupt and long drawn-out movements of light-masses in a darkened room, light varying from the most 
brilliant white to the deepest black - what a wealth of new expressional possibilities. Needless to say, 
these primary means of filmic representation- moving light arranged in a rhythmic pattern- was totally 
disregarded in this film as it is in modern films, in which time and again the literary content of the action 
plays the principle part. Despite the fact that the music, quite regardless of the film-play, was playing 
something different, it struck me that a film-play without music lacked something essential, a fact which 
was confirmed by the restlessness of the others present. I felt at last an unbearable oppression which 
lifted when the music started again. I account ~or this observation as follows: the temporal sequence of a 
movement can be grasped more readily and accurately through acoustical than through optical articu­
lation. If, however, a spatial delineation is organised in time to become an actual movement, understanding 
of the temporal sequence will be aided by acoustical means. The regular ticking of a clock gives a more im­
mediate and more exact feeling of time than the optical appearance, isolated from sound, of the regular 
movement of the small hand of the watch. This observation also and others, such as the way in which 
we are absorbed in the element of time when bells ring monotonously, suggests that the above proposition 
is correct. 
80 