The essence of the individual painting is the production of tensions and 
(or) formal relations on the picture plane, the production of new, coloured 
harmonies in a state of equilibrium. The essence of the reflected light 
play is the production of light-space-time tensions in colour or chiaroscuro 
harmonies and (or) in various forms by kinetic means, in a continuity of 
motion: as an optical passage of time in a state of equilibrium. 
The newly emergent impulse of time and its ever expanding articulation 
here produce a state of increased activity in the observer, who- instead 
of meditating upon a static image and instead of immersing himself in it 
definitions of elementary physics run much as follows: sounds are 'vibrations of air', but 
light is 'vibrations of ether'; the diffusion of sound is a process which takes place in material 
substances and in substances only, whereas the diffusion of light does not take place in 
substances or at least not only in substances, etc. Thus a negative answer to the question of 
closer relationships between light and sound would seem from these assumptions already 
to have been given. Nevertheless, now that we have learnt more about physics- in the light 
of which we have already accustomed ourselves to regarding optics simply as a special 
province of the theory of electricity and to explaining as many things as possible in terms of 
electro-dynamics- we no longer baldly assert that any kind of 'correspondence' between the 
two must be totally impossible. 
It is not the first time in physics that hypotheses belonging to other disciplines, including 
psychology, call for proof that is incontestable on physical grounds and by so doing also 
point to an extension of physical principles. The most recent results of 'colour-sound 
research' require physical foundation, not, indeed, in mathematical-philosophical specula­
tion, as has frequently been tried, but in exact investigations and experiments which thus need 
not shake or violate the principles of physics. Practical possibilities of solving the problem 
positively would, for example, be afforded if light and sound were to be successfully separat­
ed from their bearers -ether and air respectively - or else electrical waves made common 
bearers of both. This latter possibility is in fact objectively so easy to conceive that it must 
only be regretted that we have so far not managed to construct an apparatus similar in the 
optical sense to the sound microphone, that is, a 'light microphone', and that in all human 
probability we never shall. Because of this, we have for purposes of scientific investigation 
made an apparatus which in its effect is an almost exact equivalent of a 'light microphone'. 
The most essential parts of this system for colour-sound investigation are: the 'La Cour 
wheel' as known in fast and multiplex telegraphy, with tuning fork circuit-breaker, an 
electro-magnetic axle coupling, a photo-electric medium (a new type of selenium cell, in 
which the selenium acts as a ferment with the effect of a catalyst) and a selector disc. 
The selenium cell serves as variable resistance for the electro-magnetic coupling between the 
23 