in an imaginatively creative manner. The camera as a technical instru­
ment and the most important productive factor in film-making copies the 
objects in the world around us in a manner that is 'true to nature'. We 
must be prepared for this ; but we have hitherto been too fully prepared, 
"ith the result that the important other elements in film-making have 
been insufficiently refined: formal tensions, penetration, chiaroscuro 
relationships, movement, tempo. Thus film-makers have lostsightofthe 
possibility of using objective elements in a conspicuously filmic manner 
and have usually stuck to reproducing works of nature and stage-plays. 
Most of our contemporaries have the outlook of the age of the first steam 
locomotives. Modern illustrated papers are still behind the times - com­
pared with their vast potentialities! And what educational and civilising 
work they could and should perform! Impart the wonders of technique, 
of science, of the intellect. In large matters and small, both distant and 
near at hand•). In the field of photography there is undoubtedly a whole 
series of important works which show us the inexhaustible wonders of life. 
This has hitherto been the mission of painters of all ages. But already many 
are filled with a sense of the inadequacy of the old representational means. 
This is why many attempts on the part of painters to show the things of 
the world objectively represent an important success for the interrelation­
ship between photography and the painter's art. The reproduction of 
present-day standard forms in such pictures will however appear as crude 
experiments in representation once photographic materials are properly 
handled, in the most delicate tones of grey and brown, with the enamel 
bloom of the glossy photographic paper. When photography gains full 
recognition of its own true laws, representational composition will reach a 
peak and a perfection which could never be achieved by craft (manual) means. 
To proclaim that our optical senses have been fundamentally enriched by 
new creative principles in painting and the film still produces a revolu­
tionary effect. Most people still stick far too fast to the continuity of 
development of the manual imitative craft work ad analogiam classical 
pictures to be able to grasp this complete reorganisation. 
•) A certain improvement in this respect may be noted since the first edition of this book 
appeared. 
34 