DOMESTIC PINACOTHECA 
Equal right for every one to coequal satisfaction of his needs- such is the 
goal of all progressive work today. Technology and its capacity for mass 
production of commodities has to a great extent levelled and raised the 
niveau of humanity. The invention of printing and the mechanical press 
means that today almost everyone is in a position to acquire books. The 
possibilities of reproducing created coloured harmonies: pictures, even in 
their contemporary form, enable many people to procure stimulating col­
our compositions (reproductions, lithographs, collotypes, etc.), although 
the radio picture service as a source of more intensive distribution is prob­
ably still to come. There is also the possibility of maintaining a collection 
of coloured slides in the way that we keep gramophone records. 
Contemporary technology offers a means of assuring a wide circulation for 
'originals' too. With the aid of machine production, with the aid of exact 
mechanical and technical instruments and processes (spray-guns, 
enamelled metal, stencilling) we can today free ourselves from the 
domination of the individual hand-made piece and its market value. •) 
Such a picture will obviously not be used as it is today as a piece of 
lifeless room-decoration but will probably be kept in compartments 
on shelves or 'domestic picture-galleries' and brought out only when 
they are really needed. Such domestic picture-galleries are common 
in China and Japan. Collections of prints and drawings have long been 
•) Valuable artificial materials are being produced today for the electro-technical industry: 
turbonite, trolite, neolith, galalith, etc., etc. These materials, like aluminium, cellon, cellu­
loid, are much more suitable for pictures which have to be accurately executed than are 
canvas and wood-panel. I do not doubt that these or similar materials will soon become 
the ones most often used for easel paintings and that it will be possible to achieve quite new 
and surprising effects with them. Experiments with painting on highly polished black panels 
(trolite), on coloured transparent and translucent plates (galalith, matt and translucent 
cellon), produce strange optical effects: it looks as though the colour were floating almost 
wit~out material effect in a space in front of the plane to which it is in fact applied. 
25 