and only then becoming active - is forced almost to double his efforts 
immediately in order to be able simultaneously to comprehend and to 
participate in the optical events. Kinetic composition so to speak enables 
the observer's desire to participate to seize instantly upon new moments of 
vital insight , whereas the static image generates these reactions slowly. 
This indicates that there can be no doubt about the justification of both 
forms of creation; it lies in the necessity of creating optical experiences: 
·whether they be static or kinetic is a question of polar equalisation and of 
the rhythm which governs our manner of living•). 
'LaCour wheel' and the selector disc. In the state of full exposure the selenium cell allows 
the current of a constant battery at the intensity required for a firm coupling to flow 
without interruption, so that the electro-magnet of the axle-coupling is fully charged, 'the 
'La Cour wheel' and selector thus closely coupled and both forced to rotate at the same 
speed. Thus, when the selector is bisected, a sound corresponding to the frequency of the 
tuning fork circuit-breaker would be formed in a telephone connected in series. A beam of 
light of an intensity just strong enough for the selenium cell not to increase its resistance 
and also to continue freely to yield current of the intensity required for close coupling is 
then reduced to its fields in a prism and each spectral field then thrown separately on to the 
selenium cell. Each spectral colour changes the velocity of rotation of the selector disc in 
relation to the unreduced white beam and brings about a different frequency of exposure in 
the selenium cell and a different sound in the telephone. With the selector coupled to the 
driving wheel, the selenium cell ensures complete steadiness and exact regulation of the 
velocity of rotation of the selector, from, precisely, the frequency at full exposure down to 
total cessation when the selenium cell is completely darkened, and indeed to the finest 
gradations of 'gliding' corresponding to the nuances of the different exposures produced by 
prismatic reduction of a beam. 
The_ development of the film photographed in natural colour and the exploitation and 
perfection of the principle described above advance in closest association towards the 
'musical film', a system which makes the film image itself sonorous and 'music-generating'. 
For the present, the system of colour-sound research here described offers a means whereby 
the relationship between the qualities of sound and colour may be accurately investigated.' 
•) The same problem of justification crops up between printed literature and radio or talk­
ing film and theatre. 
24 