of leisure killed folk art. The artist who already started to become 
a specialist in the craftsman-guilds of the middle ages took over 
every aspect of its functions. Specialization was forced upon us 
through hundreds of ungoverned happenings and their mostly un­
foreseen effects; through hastened decisions in accepting and de­
veloping the machine as the only means of production; through a 
first unexpected but later forced gigantic growth of population, 
profit motives, etc., all claimed today as providential or "economic" 
necessities. For the time being, very few people know that the 
present form of specialization is a terrible weapon against us, 
against human nature. 
I am not speaking against the machine or the machine age. The 
machine is a splendid invention and will form the new basis for a 
more developed human society. But after the glorious technomania 
of the twenties, we know today that man cannot master the ma­
chine until he has learned to master himself. But how can he 
achieve this when he even does not know what he possesses, what 
his abilities and capacities are? 
He has delivered himself to thoughtless specialization which re­
sults in the development of certain of his faculties and-as a con­
sequence of this-in a rather unnatural passivity outside of his 
specialized work. 
People are taught that the best way of living is to buy other 
to use other people's skill. In other words, a dan­
people's energy, 
gerous metropolitan dogma developed that the different subject 
matters are best handled by experts and no one should violate the 
borders of his specialized work or profession. So through the divi­
sion of labor and the mechanized methods not only the production 
of daily necessities and goods has passed into the hands of special­
ists but almost every outlet for the emotional life as well. Today 
the artist-specialists have to provide for emotions. They are paid 
-if they are-for that. The sad consequence is that the biological 
interest in everything within the spheres of human existence be­
comes suffocated by the tinsel of a seemingly easygoing life. Man 
who has biologically the potential to comprehend the world with 
the entirety of his abilities, to conceive and express himself through 
different media, the word, tone, color, etc., agrees voluntarily to 
the amputation of these most valuable potentialities. Nothing proves 
better the lost feeling for the fundamentals of human life than the 
fact that has to be emphasized today: Feeling and thinking and 
their expression in any media belong to the normal living standard 
of man; to live without them means starvation of the intellectual 
and emotional side of life as missing food means starvation of the 
body. The non-verbalized expression of feeling is what we may call 
20 
Moholy-Nagy 