"purely repetitive and therefore structural" (1.6), explaining in five
world and its earthbound fate, Klee defines his Naturalism as a sym
words the nature of vertical structure as the repetitive accumulation of
bolism of great depth. The core of this third section, which is a transi
like units.
tion from observation to intuition, is defined in the axiom that is per
The second part of the Sketchbook (11.14-11.25) deals with "Dimension
haps Klee's deepest wisdom:
and Balance." Here the object, rendered by line, is related to the sub
TO STAND DESPITE ALL POSSIBILITIES TO FALL!
jective power of the human eye. Man uses his ability to move freely in
space to create for himself optical adventures. What are railroad ties? The concluding chapter (1111.33.43) allows the student a glimpse at the
forces that create optical sensation, forces that are either kinetic-mobile,
Functional cross-beams, occurring at regular intervals. Yes, but they are
or chromatic-caloric. Plato spoke of EIDOS as the inner essence of an
also subdivisions of infinite spacer capable of bisecting the third dimen
object as distinguished from the apparent outer form; and Aristotle uses
sion at a hundred different angles (11.15). Man, precariously balanced
on two unstable legs, uses optical illusion as a safety device. Horizon the term ENTELECHY when he defines the form-giving cause that mani
as concrete fact, and horizon as an imaginary safety belt that has to be fests an idea in a material configuration. True to his inductive creed,
Paul Klee demonstrates inner essence and form-giving cause on the most
believed in, are exemplified on the graceful example of the tightrope
insignificant objects, the spinning top, for instance (1111.33) that defies
walker and his bamboo pole (11.21). The purely material balance of the
gravity by the centrifugal energy of its gyrations, or the feathered arrow
scale finds its counter-part in the purely psychological balance of light
and dark, weightless and heavy colors (11.24).. The key word to this (1111.37) whose path is hampered by gravitational friction. "To be im
section reads: "non-symmetrical balance" (11.23). It asserts that "the pelled toward motion, and not to be the motor!" Thought and intention
that send the arrow on its way are identified with the supra-mechanical
bilateral conformity of two parts" which is the old definition of sym
force of the Eidos. With the ease of the perfect dancer who has subli
metry, has been superseded by "the equalization of unequal but equiv
mated his intense effort into seeming play, Paul Klee presents his new
alent parts. Dimension is in itself nothing but an arbitrary expansion
of form into height, width, depth and time. It is the balancing and naturalism through an interchange of natural phenomenon and pure
proportioning power of eye and brain that regulate this expansion of idea. The proportionate relationship of point and rudder to shaft in the
actual arrow (1111.38) is calculated on a strictly mechanical basis. But the
the object toward equilibrium and harmony.
same exactitude is applied in calculating the orbit of the symbolic arrow,
The third aspect of the study of nature in the Sketchbook (111.26-111.32)
overcoming the friction of human fear by aiming "a bit farther than
deals with the tension existing between man's ability to project himself
and the object into space, and the limitations imposed upon this urge customary-farther than possible!" The final decision rests with man's
by the gravitational pull. The linear extension of the first section of the willingness to produce energy. "The stronger the pull of the ascension
rudder, the higher the rise; the stronger the pull of the drop rudder,
book, and the balance of dimensional form in the second section, is here
the steeper the fall."
followed up with the projection of motion above and below the hori
Energy, the Sketchbook concludes, is without termination only in the
zon of the human eye. The plump line (111.26) is man's umbilical cord
to the center of the earth. It symbolizes the tragic termination of his chromatic and thermo-dynamic field. Motion that may be called infinite
will to fly, but it also symbolizes firmness and rhythm and the assuring in the sense of unending self-transformation, exists only in the activa
tion of color, moving between the fervid contrasts of utter black and
direction toward rest. The falling stone, the ascending flier, the shooting
utter white (1111.40) with the thermo-dynamic implications of intense
star on the firmament (111.30-32) are natural dynamics whose course is
heat and extreme cold. The last six diagrams complete the cycle that
decided by the gravitational curve. "But," Klee concludes„ "there are
regions with different laws and new symbols, signifying freer move had started on page one when the dot was stirred from its static exist
ment and more dynamical position.'] With this mere hint (111.26) at the ence into line progression. On its way through the Sketchbook it has
existence of purely spiritual dynamism, that supersedes the phenomenal
* Piet Mondrian
11
10