• 
SCULPTURE 
does not lose or gain by being either: for instance, it can be said that an as) m­
metrical sculpture has more points of view. But this is only one aspct t of the 
sculptural entity asymmetry can be found in the tension, balance, inner vital 
impact with space and in the scale. 
The fact that a plastic projection of thought can only li\ e b) its inner 
power and not by physical content, means that the range for its choice of fot m 
is free and unlimited- the range of many forms to one form, surprisin~ depths 
and juxtapositions to the most subtle, very small to very large .• \II arc equal, 
and capable of the maximum oflife according to the intensity of the vision. 
Scale is not physical size, because a very small thing can have good scale or 
a very large thing poor scale-though often large sculptures achieve good scale 
the artist approaches their conception with a greater seriousness and 
because 
thought. Size can be emphasized by the ju.xtaposition of the very large to the 
very small; but this is only one side of sculptural relationships. There is the 
sculpture which has magnificent scale because of its precise and exact rela­
tionship between dimension and idea-it creates space for itself by its own 
vitality. There are two main sculptural identities-one which comes '"''ithin the 
embrace of our hands and arms, and the other which stands free and unrelated 
to our sense of touch. Both have their distinct and individual quality of scale 
which makes an expansion and spaciousness in everything surrounding them. 
Scale is connected with our whole life-perhaps it is even our ,,vhole intuitiYe 
capacity to feel life. 
II 
The most difficult and complicated form relationships do not necessarily 
give a sculpture the fullest spiritual content. Very often, as the thought be­
comes more free the line is purified, and as principles-the laws which contain 
lesser laws-are comprehended, the forms become simplified and strengthened. 
In the physical world we can discover in the endless variations of the same 
form, the one particular form which demonstrates the power and robustness of 
the simplified structure- the form is clear and every part of it in precise unity 
with the whole. It is not the accidental or casual, but the regular irregularity, 
the perfect sequence which gives the maximum expression of individual life. In 
the three-dimensional realization there is always this exact form, or sequence of 
form-which can most fully and freely convey the idea. But there is no formula 
that can reveal the sequence; the premise is individual and the logical sequence 
purely intuitive-the result of equilibrium between thought and medium. 
I 14 