THE QUARREL WITH REALI SM 
means of an appropriate colour. But I can also, if the place is suitable, call in a 
painter and ask him to register here his plastic thoughts and at one blow open 
all the doors to the deep land of dreams-especially there, where there is no real 
depth. 
H ere, then, is an exceptionally favourable opportunity to collaborate with 
the painter. I t is camouflage placed at the service of thought. With the same ob­
ject in view, recourse may also be made to photography- photographic setting. 
The second method of association with painting admits of a more pre­
conceived intention. The architect can arrange his plans with the desire- at a 
given moment-of introducing the note of plastic lyricism. It is then a com­
bination of deep harmony. But there is always the danger of the dualism of two 
plastic arts out of tune with one another: heterogeneous architecture and 
. . 
pamtmg. 
In the collaboration visualized here, mural painting and sculpture with the 
architecture, restraint is necessary, special qualities of monumentalism and 
careful preparation. In this-because the dinner plate is the architecture of 
modern times-I do not see that we can go back to anything in the past, 
neither to R embrandt or Rubens, nor to the Quattrocento or the Gothic. 
I said before that cubism had opened the gates to the universality of the 
great periods of art. We must see in this fact only encouragement to go forward. 
What they expressed was the strength of geometry, symbolism, anthropocen­
tric powers, and their expression was pushed to the limits of clarity. 
I have finished. I would close on this note: if we are misjudged now in our 
manifestations of renewal, if the contemporary arts, painting, sculpture and 
" 
1 
" 
even architecture are only tolerated with a certain reserve, it is that we have 
• 
never had the opportunity to create anything-! mean just as much a small 
' 
house as a part of a town- or the surroundings have been unsuitable. We have 
always been pushed to one side because the ground was occupied by vestiges 
b 
of the past-good or bad. We are in the proportion of r per cent. modern 
spirit to 99 per cent. ancient environment. Nothing was elevated, everything 
was against harmony, and our part was always to appear like boors, our feet 
covered with mud or manure, appearing to state our views in an elegant and 
tranquil society. Our manners have, therefore, sometimes been insolent, in 
spite of ourselves. When harmony will have attained sufficient dimensions, the 
emotions of the people, of the masses, will be stirred. And, as Leger has said, in 
very welcome, very optimistic words, at that moment the people will not be 
wrong. They will say: 'I t is well.' 
73 