THE CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA IN ART 
Energy, between Space and Time, bet\'\'een the mystery of the world in the 
atom and the consistent miracle of our galaxy. 
I do not mean to say by this that these scientific theories have affected the 
ideology of the Cubists, one must rather presume that none of those artists had 
so much as heard of or studied those theories. It is much more probable that 
they would not have apprehended them even if they had heard about them, 
and in the end it is entirely superfluous. The state of ideas in this time has 
brought both creative disciplines to adequate results, each in its own field, so 
that the edifice of Art as well as the edifice of Science was undermined and 
corroded by a spirit of fearless analysis which ended in a revolutionary ex­
plosion. Yet the destruction produced in the world of Art was more violent and 
more thorough. 
Our own generation found in the world of Art after the work of the Cubists 
only a conglomeration of ruins. The Cubistic analysis had left for us nothing of 
the old traditions on which we could base even the flimsiest foundation. We 
have been compelled to start from the beginning. \\'e had a dilemma to resolve, 
\·\'hether to go further on the way of destruction or to search for new bases for 
the foundation of a new Art. Our choice was not so difficult to make. The logic 
and the natural artistic instinct prompted us with its solution. 
oflife 
The logic of life does not tolerate permanent revolutions. They are pos­
I 
sible on paper but in real life a revolution is only a means, a tool but never an 
aim. It allows the destruction of obstacles which hinder a new construction, 
but destruction for destruction's sake is contrary to life. Every analysis is useful 
and even necessary, but when this analysis does not care about the results, when 
it excludes the task of finding a synthesis, it turns to its opposite, and instead of 
clarifying a problem it only renders it more obscure. Life permits to our desire 
for knowledge and exploration the most daring and courageous excursions, but 
only to the explorers who, enticed far away into unknown territories, have not 
forgotten to notice the way by which they came and the aim for which they 
started. In Art more than anywhere else in the creative discipline, daring ex­
peditions are a llowed. The most dizzying experiments are permissible, but even 
in Art the logic of life arrests the experiments as soon as they have reached the 
point when the death of the experimental objects becomes imminent. There 
were moments in the history of Cubism when the artists were pushed to these 
points; sufficient to recall the sermons ofPicabia, 1914-16, predicting 
bursting 
the wreck of Art, and the manifestos of the Dadaists who already celebrated the 
funeral of Art with chorus and demonstrations. Realizing how near to corn-
S 