• 
ART EDUCATION AND STATE* 
By Walter Gropius 
THE history of the evolution of things into shapes is the story of a struggle be­
tween the demands made by man on the purpose or object of the thing on the 
one hand, and on its expression, that is to say, its form, on the other hand. The 
questions concerning the object or purpose of a thing are of a super-individual­
istic nature; they represent the organic evolution as we see it in nature. For 
example, the development of a technical apparatus, such as a locomotive, is 
the result of the intellectual work of numerous individuals who, like links in the 
chain of development, built up on the efforts of their predecessors. 
On the other hand, the demands which we impose on the Expression, that 
is to say, on the form of a thing, are of a purely spiritual nature. The form is 
not a product of the intellect, but of human desire, and is therefore closely 
associated with the individual, with the nation and with place and time. The 
history of art contains many examples which reflect the struggle between in­
tellect and desire, even to the most absurd contradictions between purpose and 
shape. In our mechanical age, however, a new conception is beginning to make 
itself felt. Today, we insist upon the form of a thing following the function of 
that thing, upon the desire for expression of its creator following the same 
direction as the organic building-up processes in nature, and not running coun­
ter to that direction. We insist upon harmony again being achieved between 
intellect and desire. We are once again striving towards unity in the cultural 
world around us, out of the boundless diversities in which the individual feels 
himself helpless and alone. The age just past, with its 'isms' and its historical 
imitations, was, perhaps, merely the reflection of our unconscious desire to 
probe the secrets of the whole visible world, in order, in our longing for totality, 
to overlook nothing of importance in a new world. 
*See The Year Book of Education, 1936. Montague House, London, W.C. I. 
238 