• 
ROUTES OF HOUSING ADVANCE 
1 
on it. \\'hy docs capital not grasp thisd1~u1ce. ,\ns\\cr: tiH'It' is no \\ay knm\It 
to ascertain\\ hcthcr a quantil) acceptant c "ill c:-.ist, "ht'n tltc ntarkct opens. 
Is acccpt.mcc not insured if" e oll'ct: 
Lm' cosL> 
1 
Smooth functioning of increased cq uipmcn l.
Quality \\'ith clurabilit) and lcm upkeep fcH· a ddinite tnm or amor­
tization? 
\\'ill not the prc-fabricatecl' llouscofthe FutUic' a" pictured in the ~unclay 
papers indeed offer this? and '' ho could resist such ttn oflcr? 
The truth is that the house of the future rises beyond a period of transient 
experimentation, which so far, however, no experienced capitalist group'' ishcs 
to finance. Low cost, smooth functioning, timed durability and quality arc the 
by-product of a carefully modelled and yearly remodelled quantit) plocluc­
tion. I t requires an expensive and definitely directed laboratory research in the 
co-ordination and integration of many elements. The problem is one of neat~1 
joining all the parts to a consistent and combined performance that \\ill con­
vince. Just \vhat may constitute a liveable environment at this historical mo­
ment becomes an issue of a high-priced campaign of convincing; subjected to 
an undirected American plebiscite it remains highly controversial. 
To pay for the maintenance of laboratories, test executions, high-grade re­
search workers' wages, may spell bankruptcy if sales on a large scale cannot 
soon be induced. Quantity sales cannot be secured except by a costly nation­
wide advertising action. This again is senseless before the machinery set up for 
production is at hand, so that inquiries can immediately be answered with de­
liveries-a vicious circle! 
Big finance- before implicating itself-returns to the crucial question: Can 
pre-fabricated houses be sold in ten-thousand lots, if only in such quantity they 
can be distributed at reasonable price and in superior quality? 
No big manufacturer in U.S.A. has, for example, succeeded in standardiz­
ing inter-city buses so that a machinery set up for light-weight all-metal frames 
has proven justified. This is characteristic and it speaks through analogy. Called 
in by the largest American bus-building company to re-design their product 
and process of production for all-aluminium construction based on an im­
mense tool investment, the writer found a fine occasion for getting instructed 
on what acceptance problems clog the way to standardized pre-fabrication; 
and bus-operating companies could be expected to be less individualistic, 
by pressure of their circumstances and predilections, than householders. 
208 