• 
CONSTRUCTION AND AESTHETI CS 
gether; their three-pin articulation on a level with the CTO\\ nand .lt the abut­
ments (the slightly ogival pointing of the summit of the .1rch \\hie h results 
should be noted); the upright slabs that act as vcrtic,d tics between the arch­
ribs and the platform; as also the interplay of the pattern of thC'iC members 
with that produced by the unusual section of the columns of the' iaducts- you 
must not only go and sec it, but clamber clmvn the shingle to the 1 i' cr's bank 
so as to gain a \'iew of the structure from underneath. There arc few con­
temporary technical buildings in which the solution of the structural problem 
approaches so closely to pure plastic expression. 
Construction and Aesthetics. Before I throw out the question which underlies 
this analysis one or two striking features of 11aillart's bridges may be touched 
on without entering into the technique of his structural methods. 
Sculpture and Nature. One of the problems in art in which research has not 
yet made much headway is the relation between scuJpture and nature- and 
beyond this again the inter-relations between sculpture, painting and archi­
tecture. It is easier for the constructor to find a convincing solution than the 
artist, because physical factors (like the width of the interval to be spanned, the 
nature of the foundations, etc.) dictate its conditions. All the same there is 
something altogether out of the ordinary in the way 1v1aillart succeeds both in 
expressing and sublimating the breadth of a chasm cleft between two walls of 
rock (i.e. in his Salginatobel-Brucke, I 929-30). His shapely bridges spring 
out of shapeless crags with the serene inevitability of Greek temples. The lithe 
elastic resilience with which they leap from side to side, the attenuation of their 
dimensions, merges into the co-ordinated rhythms of arch, platform and the 
upended slabs between them. 
A bridge designed on a system of slabs of various shapes no longer resem­
bles the ordinary kind of bridge either in its form or its proportions. For eyes 
that are blind to the optical vision of our own day, slanting columns with grot­
esquely splayed-out heads, like those of the Thur-Brucke's approach viaducts 
-a form imposed by purely structural considerations that enabled 11aillart 
to make two columns do the work of four- are bound to appear somewhat 
ugly; whereas eyes schooled by contemporary art recognize in these shapes an 
echo of those with which modern painting has already familiarized them. 
When Picasso paints half-geometric, half-organic plastic images on can\'as 
-forms which in spite of their apparently capricious projection somehow 
achieve a singular degree of equipoise-and the constructor (proceeding from 
purely technical premises) arrives at similarly absolute forms by substituting 
226 