CONSTRUCTION AND AESTHETICS 
who commission the building of bridges and those who merely chance to look 
at them; and how often these feelings are the secret determining factor of de­
cisions apparently dictated solely by questions of cost and efficiency. 
It is therefore not unprofitable to enquire- taking Maillart's bridges as the 
basis of our investigations-how the aesthetic effect produced by a new type of 
construction arises and what underlies it. 
The Technical Position. Technology has long since passed the stage of open­
minded experiment. A century of practical experience has now become crys­
tallized in to definite forms, definite methods. Established formulas are, of 
course, indispensable, but the a priori inevitability with which they fetter the 
mind, compelling it to adopt a prescribed direction, presents a grave danger of 
fossilization. 
Today technology has put the period of bold, often leap-frog advances be­
hind it, and has entered a stage of routine based on acquired experience. At 
present it seems harder to strike out a new line in construction than in art, and 
resistance to the former has increased. vVhenever a new idea emerges, past ex­
perience and present methods are at once ca1led in aid to prove that its adop­
tion would be a step in the wrong direction. Hence the structural engineer is 
now deprived of that unprejudiced outlook which amplified his powers of 
achievement during the last century. The names of those who, in our own day, 
can use their imagination in the field of construction without letting accepted 
formulas and existing practice hamper it could be counted on one's fingers. 
The Artistic Position. In the course of the nineteenth century technology 
created a whole world of new forms: steam cranes, railway bridges, and exhi­
bition halls with unprecedented roof-spans. These were esteemed as structural 
achievements and milestones of 'progress', or for the functions they performed. 
But .in terms of emotion people could neither appraise them, nor fit them into 
the scheme of things. Being unable to grasp their emotional content, they re­
nounced the attempt and refused to admit its existence, relegating one and all 
of them to the category of the merely useful. 
This brings us straight to the most interesting question of all: How did the 
severance implied occur, and what causes brought it about? 
There was a difference in principle between the methods which had led 
engineers to evolve such unexpected forms and those that prevailed in contem­
porary painting; for the means employed in each were on a wholly different 
level. 
Aesthetics could not assimilate these new realities because in his own 
221 