• 
SCULPTURE: CARVING AND 
ests. The method of their fight is ah\ays the same .. \t the bcginnin{{ thq lt y to 
prm·c that the nev\ idea is nonsensical, impossible or'' ickl'd. \\hen this f~tils 
they try to prm·e that the new idea is not at all new or ori~inal and th<Tef())'(· 
of no interest. \\'hen this also docs not work they ha,·c recourse to the l.to.;t .mel 
most effective means: the method of isolation; that is to sa), the) st,u t to .1ssert 
that the new idea, even if it is new and original, docs not belong to the domain 
of ideas which it is trying to complete. So, for instance, if it bclmH{'i to science, 
they say it has nothing to do with science; if it belongs to art, they say it has 
nothing to do with art. This is exactly the method used b) our ach·ersaries, '' ho 
have been saying ever since the beginning of the new art, and especialJy the 
Constructive Art, that our painting has nothing to do with painting and our 
sculpture has nothing to do with sculpture. At this point I leave it to my ft iencls 
the painters to explain the principles of a constructive and absolute painting 
and will only try to clarify the problems in my own domain of sculpture. 
According to the assertions of our adversaries, two symptoms deprive con­
structive sculpture of its sculptural character. First, that we are abstract in our 
carving as well as in our constructions, and second that \Ve insert a ne\v prin­
ciple, the so-called construction in space, which kills the whole essential basis of 
sculpture as being the art of solid masses. 
A detailed examination of this slander seems to be necessary. 
What are the characteristics which make a work of art a sculpture? Is the 
Egyptian Sphinx a sculpture? Certainly, yes. Why? It cannot be only for the 
reason that it consists of stone or that it is an accumulation of solid masses, for 
if it were so, then why is not any house a sculpture, and why are the Himalayan 
Mountains not a sculpture? Thus there must be some other characteristics 
which distinguish a sculpture from any other solid object. I think they could be 
easily established by considering that every sculpture has the following 
attributes:-
!. It consists of concrete material bounded by forms. 
II. It is intentionally built up by mankind in three-dimensional space. 
III. It is created for this purpose only, to make visible the emotions ,.vhich 
the artist wishes to communicate to others. 
These are the main attributes which we find in every sculptural work since 
the art of sculpture began, and which distinguish a sculptural work from any 
other object. Any other attributes which appear are of a secondary and tem­
porary nature and do not belong to the basic substance of sculpture. In so far 
as these main attributes are present in some of our surroundings we have al-
104 