CONSTRUCTION AND AESTHETICS 
two vertical supports for four, there is a clear inference that mechanical shapes 
and the shapes evolved by art as the mirror of a higher reality rank pari passu in 
terms of development. 
It is, of course, easy enough to retort that this is simply the result of chance, 
and that such resemblances are purely superficial. But we cannot afford to leave 
the matter there, for what concerns us is the question which must serve as our 
point of departure: 
Are the methods which underlie the artist's work related to those of the 
modern structural engineer?- In fact is there a direct affinity between the prin­
ciples now current in painting and construction? 
We know the great importance which surface has acquired in the composi­
tion of a picture, and the long road that had to be traversed-starting from 
Manet's light-fusion of paint, by way of Cezanne's flat colouration and the 
work of Matisse, and ending with Cubism- before this was finally recognized. 
Surface, which was formerly held to possess no intrinsic capacity for ex­
pression, and so at best could only find decorative utilization, has now become 
the basis of composition, thereby supplanting perspective, which had triumphed 
over each successive change of style ever since the Renaissance. 
With the Cubist's conquest of space, and the abandonment of one prede­
termined angle of vision which went hand in hand with it, surface acquired a 
significance it had never known before. Our powers of perception became 
widened and sharpened in consequence. We discovered the interplay of impon­
derably floating elements irrationally penetrating or fusing into each other, as 
also the optical tensions which arise from the contrasts between various tex­
tural effects (the handling of colour qua colour, or the use of other media like 
sand, bits of dress fabrics and scraps of paper to supplement pigments). The 
human eye awoke to the spectacle of form, line and colour-that is the whole 
grammar of composition-reacting on one another within an orbit of hovering 
planes; or, as J. Sweeney calls it, 'the plastic organization of forms suggested 
by line and colour on a fiat surface'. 
If Maillart, speaking as an engineer, can claim to have developed the slab 
into a basic element of construction, modern painters can answer with equal 
justice that they have made surface an essential factor in the composition of a 
picture. The slab for long remained unheeded and unmastered: an inert in­
adaptable thing which defied calculation and so utilization. But just as a great 
constructor has transformed it into a medium for solving structural problems 
that had always been considered insuperable, so the development of surface 
227 