THE STATE OF TRANSITION 
By J. L. Martin 
THE modern movement in architecture has developed rapidly in this country 
during the last few years. By this I do not refer to the increase of modernistic 
garages, or the moderne dance halls and amusement palaces of our seaside 
resorts. Whilst at first glance these 'imitations' may seem to point to a growing 
interest in contemporary design, on closer observation it becomes clear that 
they are not only misguided effort but even a positive danger. It should be 
said at once that the appeal of the 'modernistic' is the spurious appeal of sur­
face decoration: yet another manifestation of that passion for 'fa<_;ade' which 
dragged out its life through the nineteenth century and which now presents 
itself in its most heterogeneous form. 
The conditions under which modern architecture has to develop are par­
ticularly confusing and it is perhaps worth while, even at the risk of retreading 
well-worn ground, to consider the position in further detail. The difficulty 
which must at once arise is that of seeing a development with which we are so 
closely connected in anything like its proper perspective. But it is possible, at 
least, to see more clearly the prevailing conditions of the nineteenth century in 
which the present has its roots. From even the most cursory glance at the 
course of change from the early nineteenth century to the present day, it is 
clear that, in most spheres of activity, a rapid development has taken place: 
but we must at the same time recognise that this development consists largely 
of one-sided advances. The nineteenth century presents itself as a series of 
divided activities; in architecture, a tremendous gain in the structural and 
engineering development offset by a loss of form. The result is a lack of co­
ordination; a separation of the formal, technical and social problems with 
which architecture is unavoidably linked. The formal has created its own 
separate and independent world. The technical development has introduced 
215 