51. YORKE AND BREUER 
• 
• 
------
---
---·--
---
--··--
---
---·--
---
--·---
·--
·-·· ·- - ------
---···--
- --- .-
' 
• 
~----} 
.... 
~= 
The school The school and housing 
A GARDEN CITY OF THE FUTURE 
This model is an attempt to embody a visual presentation of an entirely ne\\ or ·ideal' city. 
One of its chief values lies in its demonstration of principle, and the data it provides in reg-ard 
to the size and shape of a city, its building density, the situation and structural form or its 
various quarters, and its particular system of urban transport. The maximum superficial 
dimensions of the model base (g feet 6 inches by 5 feet 6 inches) proYided a certain limitation. 
To a scale of r /2oth of an inch to the foot these dimensions represent an area approximately 
half a mile long by a quarter of a mile deep, which must be supposed to stretch along the north 
shore of a lake or river. As only a relatively small slice of the centre of the city could be included 
in the model, the designers confined themselves to a few typical quarters- a residential dis­
trict ,,vith its local school to the west, the shopping district occupies the middle of the plan with 
a theatre, cafes and bathing place (the recreational area) along the water front to the south of 
this, to the east is the business district with its blocks of offices and administration buildings. 
The city must be imagined as extending westwards over further residential districts with their 
own schools and playing fields eastwards, over an industrial area towards the port, and north­
wards continuing the general planning disposition prevailing to the east and west. Arterial 
are kept away from the waterfront, which is segregated for public recreation: the main 
roads 
east-west thoroughfare lies inland. At the point where this crosses the great ::'oJorth road there 
is a tube station with non-stop services of trains eastwards to the harbour, and northwards to 
the airport, both of which lie outside the range of the model. 
In order to produce a maximum of air and light the buildings are designed as large blocks 
·widely spaced, the open spaces being reserved for parks, p laying fields and traffic facilities. A 
uniform height of t\velve storeys is adopted as calculations have shown that this height pro­
vides the most rational utilisation of site area. If three storey de\·elopn.ent is compared with 
the twelve storeyed type adopted in the model, and if the inten·als between the blocks are 
assumed to be twice the height of the blocks in each case, the reduction of built up area chat is 
by the latter amounts to no less than 40 per cent. It follows that, in using the higher 
achieved 
building, there was no intention to crowd the city or to encourage an unnaturally intensi,·e 
utilisation of ground area; with proper restrictions (such as the imposition of a minimum 
angle oflight for all windows) all the only too manifest evils of existing American cities can be 
avoided, while the adoption of higher buildings ensures a type of garden city planning in 
which the distances from point to point are reduced to a minimum. With this type of plan too, 
of traffic conditions becomes automatic, there are fe"·er house doors, fewer 
the simplification 