THE CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA IN ART 
However dangerous it may be to make far-reaching ana logies between .\rt 
and Science, we nevertheless cannot dose our eyes to the fact that at those 
moments in the history of culture when the creative human genius had to make 
a decision, the forms in which this genius manifested itself in Art and in Science 
were analogous. One is inclined to think that this manifestation in the history 
of Art lies on a lower level than it does in the history of Science, or at least on 
a level which is accessible to wider social control. T'he terminology of Science 
alone plunges a layman into a state of fear, humility and admiration. The 
inner world of Science is closed to an outsider by a curtain of enigmas. H e has 
been educated to accept the holy mysticism of these enigmas since the begin­
ning of culture. He does not even try to intrude in this world in order to know 
what happens there, being convinced that it must be something very important 
since he sees the results in obvious technical achievements. The average man 
knows, for instance, that there is electricity and that there is radio and he uses 
them every day. H e knows the names of Marconi and Edison, but it is doubtful 
whether he has ever heard anything about the scientific work of H ertz, and 
there is no doubt that he has never heard anything about the electro-magnetic 
waves theory of Maxwell or his mathematical formulae. 
Not so is the attitude of the average man to Art. Access to the realm of Art 
is open to every man. He judges about Art with the unconstrained ease of an 
employer and owner. He does not meditate about th0se processes which 
brought the artist or the group of artists to make one special kind of Art and 
not another, or if occasionally he does he never relinquishes his right to 
judge and decide, to accept or reject; in a word, he takes up an attitude which 
he would never allow himself to take with Science. He is convinced that on his 
judgments depend the value and the existence of the work of art. He does not 
suspect that through the mere fact of its existence a work of art has already 
performed the function for which it has been made and has affected his con­
cept of the world regardless of whether he wants it to or not. The creative pro­
cesses in the domain of Art are as sovereign as the creative processes in Science. 
Even for many theorists of Art the fact remains unperceived that the same 
spiritual state propels artistic and scientific activity at the same time and in the 
same direction. 
At first sight it seems unlikely that an analogy can be drawn between a 
scientific work of, say, Copernicus and a picture by Raphael, and yet it is not 
difficult to discover the tie between them. In fact Copernicus' scientific theory 
of the world is coincident with Raphael's concept in Art. Raphael would 
2 