• 
PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTI C ART 
figurative work, but they do not constitute its content. \\'c rcpc~ll, that its con­
tent cannot be described, and that it is only through pure plastics and llll ough 
the execution of the work that it can be made apparent. Through this indctct­
minable content, the non-figurative work is ~fully human ' . Execution and tech­
nique play an important part in the aim of establishing a more or less objccti\·c 
vision which the essence of the non-figurative work demands. The less obvious 
the artist's hand is the more objective \\·ill the work be. This fact leads to a 
preference for a more or less mechanical execution or to the employment of 
materials produced by industry. Hitherto, of cou rse, these materials have been 
imperfect from the point of view of art. If these materials and their colouts 
were more perfect and if a technique existed by which the artist could easily 
cut them up in order to compose his work as he conceives it, an art more real 
and more objective in relation to life than painting would arise. All these 
reflections evoke questions which have already been asked many years ago, 
mainly: is art still necessary and useful for humanity? Is it not even harmful to 
progress? Certainly the art of the past is superfluous to the new spirit and harm­
ful to its progress: just because of its beauty it holds many people back from the 
new conception. The new art is, however, still very necessary to life. In a clear 
manner it establishes the laws according to which a real balance is reached. 
Moreover, it must create among us a profoundly human and rich beauty 
realized not only by the best qualities of the new architecture, but also by all 
that the constructive art in painting and sculpture makes possible. 
But although the new art is necessary, the mass is conservative. Hence 
these cinemas, these radios, these bad pictures which overwhelm the few works 
which are really of our era. 
I t is a great pity that those who are concerned with the social life in gene­
ral do not realize the utility of pure abstract art. Wrongly influenced by the 
art of the past, the true essence of which escapes them, and of which they only 
see that which is superfluous, they make no effort to know pure abstract art. 
Through another conception of the word 'abstract', they have a certain horror 
of it. They are vehemently opposed to abstract art because they regard it as 
something ideal and unreal. In general they use art as propaganda for collec­
tive or personal ideas, thus as literature. They are both in favour of the pro­
gress of the mass and against the progress of the elite, thus against the logical 
march of human evolution. I s it really to be believed that the evolution of the 
mass and that of the elite are incompatible? The elite rises from the mass; is it 
not therefore its highest expression? 
54 