• 
CONSTRUCTION AND AESTHETICS 
into a basic principle of composition in painting has resulted in opening up un­
tapped fields of optical expression. 
This is no longer a fortuitous optical coincidence, as mi~ht be objc< ted, 
but a definite identity of methods. By what mental proccsses thc constructor and 
the painter have arrived at it defies analysis. \\'e can only authenticate a p.u­
ticular phenomenon in a particular case: that a new method of construe tion 
has found its simultaneous echo in a parallel method in art. But this prm es that 
underlying the special power of visualization implicit in each of these fields 
similar elements have emerged which provide a creative impetus for both of 
them. 
If the constructor, who necessarily proceeds from quite different considera­
tions, finds he has to adopt substantially the same basic element as the artist in 
order to solve his own technical problems, this signifies that in each case 
similar methods have informed optical imagination. 
Contemporary artists continually reiterate the claim that their work forms 
part ofNature's. This they explain as follows : 'modern art has reached the same 
results as modern science by entirely independent, intuitive steps. Like science 
it has resolved the shape of things into their basic elements with the object of 
reconstituting them in consonance with the universal laws of Nature.' :'\ow 
those forms in concrete which ignore former conventions in design are likewise 
the product of a process of 'resolution into basic elements' (for a slab is an 
irreducible element) that uses reconstruction as a means of attaining a more 
rational synthesis. 
In this connection mention should be made of the 'egg-shell' concrete 
vaulting which Freyssinet used for some locomotive-sheds he built at Bagneux, 
outside Paris, in I 929; though since then that particular branch of reinforced­
concrete engineering has produced forms of almost phantastic daring. On the 
same principle of using the slab as an active structural member, the Finnish 
architect, Alvar Aalto, has struck out an entirely new line in furniture design. 
He uses thin sheets of plywood, which, like the concrete slab, was formerly re­
garded as useless for purposes of structural support. 
In the community of method which now prevails in so many departments 
of human activity we may read a presage of far-reaching developments. The 
growth of this span tan eo us identity of approach, and its repercussions on society, 
are being separately studied in every branch of knowledge. That there is are­
markable analogy between recent departures in philosophy, physics, literature, 
art and music is a fact which has frequently been commented on. In the light 
228 