PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
action of the human duality, this art has been realized by the mutual interaction 
of constructive elements and their inherent relations. This process consists in mutual 
purification; purified constructive elements set up pure relationships, and these 
in their turn demand pure constructive elements. Figurative art of today is the 
outcome of figurative art of the past, and non-figurative art is the outcome of 
the figurative art of today. Thus the unity of art is maintained. 
If non-figurative art is born of figurative art, it is obvious that the two 
factors of human duality have not only changed, but have also approached 
one another towards a mutual balance; towards unity. One can rightly speak 
of an evolution in plastic art. It is of the greatest importance to note this fact, for 
it reveals the true way of art; the only path along which we can advance. 
Moreover, the evolution of the plastic arts shows that the dualism which has 
manifested itself in art is only relative and temporal. Both science and art are 
discovering and making us aware of the fact that time is a process of intensification, 
an evolution from the individual towards the universal, of the subjective to足
wards the objective; towards the essence of things and of ourselves. 
A careful observation of art since its origin shows that artistic expression 
seen from the outside is not a process of extending but of intensifying one and the same 
thing, universal beauty; and that seen from the inside it is a growth. Extension 
results in a continual repetition of nature; it is not human and art cannot 
follow it. So many of these repetitions which parade as 'art' clearly cannot 
arouse emotions. 
Through intensification one creates successively on more profound planes; 
extension remains always on the same plane. Intensification, be it noted, is 
diametrically opposed to extension; they are at right angles to each other as 
are length and depth. This fact shows clearly the temporal opposition of non足
figurative and figurative art. 
But if throughout its history art has meant a continuous and gradual change in 
the expression of one and the same thing, the opposition of the two trends- in our 
time so clear-cut- is actually an unreal one. It is illogical that the two prin足
cipal tendencies in art, figurative and non-figurative (obj ective and subjective) 
should be so hostile. Since art is in essence universal, its expression cannot rest on 
a subjective view. Our human capacities do not allow of a perfectly objective 
view, but that does not imply that the plastic expression of art is based on sub足
jective conception. Our subjectivity realizes but does not create the work. 
If the two human inclinations already mentioned are apparent in a work 
of art, they have both collaborated in its realization, but it is evident that the 
43 