• 
ROUTES OF HOUSING ADVANCE 
The municipally built '' orkers' colonies of Os.1k.1, or whnc-l oil at apatl­
mcnls in Tokyo, J apttn, or housing blocks for longshorc-m('ll <'l'('rtcd 1)\ t ht' 
Harbour Commission of Singapore the writct found more reaclil] .tcccptul in 
spite of their graYe de\'iation from the country's habitational tradition, th.\11 the 
well-known 'Siecl tungen' done b) excellent German archi tccts, or (CJtai n \,iss, 
.\ustrian and Dutch colonies. 
In the most fortunate examples of governmentally initiated and planned 
colonies, good communal grouping, economical but convincing unit layouts, 
and reliable, if rather traditional, material specification ha,·c been accom­
plished. Some steel-frame designs for multi-storey housin~ in Germ.m) .md 
France perhaps constitute an exception to this rule and surpass the m·erage. In 
American cases these developments have been rather slow to stimulate a truly 
progressive technical design and have reYerted to the structural routine of yes­
terday's practice, which seemed to offer easier possibilities of secure ach·ance 
cost computation and of building up to the necessary \\'Orking organization 
from existing resources. 
The fourth possible initiative in housing and rehousing activity might, as 
mentioned, have its origin in, and might receive its impetus from, a group of 
technologically advanced industries which planfully move into a largely new 
market as an outlet for pressure of production. The various schemes of ad­
vanced shop preparation, which in the last years caught the attention of maga­
zine readers and by structural connoisseurs had been predicted for decades, are 
an exemplification of this aspect. However, it is here, where mass acceptance of 
habitational innovations becomes a burning issue and where the possibility of 
an unmitigated 'octroy' or imposition on the consumer appears as out of the 
• 
questiOn. 
The largely shop-prepared construction or complete pre-fabrication will, 
in order to be economical on a higher technological level, call for new layouts, 
new subdivisions and grouping, new appearances; in short for practical, psy­
chological, aesthetical acceptance of the consumer. Inventive individuals have 
prepared a way, earned interest, embarked on educational dissemination of 
ideas. But here mass acceptance becomes a premise, as this new industrial ap­
plication has but a limited chance to cater to individual predilection. If and 
when accepted, however, the new .field of activity seems nearly boundless, 
especially as it ushers in an unprecedented turnover, a shortening of the obso­
lescence and replacement period of the dwelling commodity. 
In the United States at the present moment, the initiative of the govern-
206 