• 
' 
SCULPTURE 
Contemporary constructive work docs not lose by not h.tvin~ p.ttticular 
human interest, drama, fear or religious emotion. J t moves us ptofoumll) he­
cause it represents the whoJc of the artist's experience and vision, his'' hole sen­
sibility to enduring ideas, his whole desire for a realization of these idc.ls in 
life and a complete rejection of the transitory and local forces of destruct ion. 
It is an absolute belief in man, in landscape and in the universal 1 elation­
ship of constructive ideas. The abstract forms of his work arc now unconscious 
and intuitive- his individual manner of expression. His conscious life is bent 
• 
on discovering a solution to human difficulties by solving his own thought 
permanently, and in relation to his medium. If we had lived at a time when ani­
mals, fire worship, myth or religion were the deepest emotional aspects of life, 
sculpture would have taken the form, unconsciously, of a recognizable god; and 
the formal abstract relationships in the representation would have been the 
conscious way of vitalizing these ideas; but now, these formal relationships have 
become our thought, our fai th, waking or sleeping-they can be the solution to 
life and to living. This is no escapism, no ivory tower, no isolated pleasure in 
proportion and space-it is an unconscious manner of expressing our belief in a 
possible life. The language of colour and form is universal and not one for a 
special class (though this may have been in the past)-it is a thought which gives 
the same life, the same expansion, the same universal freedom to everyone. 
The artist rebels against the world as he finds it because his sensibility re­
veals to him the vision of a world that could be possible- a world idealistic, but 
practical-idealistic, inclusive of all vitality and serenity, harmony and dyna­
mic movement-a concept of a freedom of ideas which is all-inclusive except to 
that which causes death to ideas. In his rebellion he can take either of two 
courses-he can give way to despair and wildly try to overthrow all those 
things which seem to stand between the world as it appears to be and the world 
as it could be-or he can passionately affirm and re-affirm and demonstrate in 
his plastic medium his faith that this world of ideas does exist. He can demon­
strate constructively, believing that the plastic embodiment of a free idea-a 
universal truth of spiritual power-can do more, say more and be more 
vividly potent, because it puts no pressure on anything. 
A constructive work is an embodiment of freedom itself and is uncon­
sciously perceived even by those who are consciously against it. The desire to 
live is the strongest universal emotion, it springs from the depths of our un­
conscious sensibility-and the desire to give life is our most potent, constructive, 
conscious expression of this intuition. 
116 