N EW TYPOGRAPHY 
By Jan T sch ichold 
T HE new typography aims at a clear presentation of typographical images by 
jmmaculate technique and by the use of forms which correspond to the new 
feeling for space. Every deviation from tradition is by no means new typo足
graphy in our sense of the word. Vve demand also that the resultant form 
should be beautiful-thus it would be wrong to designate the new typography 
as anti-aesthetic. But we consider the use of ornament and rules in the manner 
of earlier styles as disturbing and contrary to the contemporary spirit. The 
form should arise clearly and unequivocally out of the requirements of the text 
and pictures only, and according to the functions of the printed matter. New 
traditionalism in typography demands exactly the same. Yet in spite of the 
great austerity and purity of its manner as well as other qualities its products 
are characterized by a certain steri1ity because these works proceed from an 
earlier feeling of space. Even this can exercise a certain charm on the man of 
today, but it corresponds to the charm that emanates from an old work of art. 
It seems to us that the attempt to create from the contemporary feeling of space 
is more worth while. 
the technical sense the new typography cannot claim any essential pro足
I n 
gress. Fundamentally, types are set today as they were 500 years ago. 11achine足
setting only imitates hand-setting and is hardly in a condition to create any足
thing formally better or even a legitimate form of its own. The potentialities of 
the modern setting-technique (speaking purely technically) must anyway be 
regarded as perfect. Our efforts, too, at employing as simple a technique as 
possible in planning the layout coincides with the methods of the early printers 
and therefore need not be especially emphasized. The real value of the new 
typography consists in its efforts towards purification and towards simplicity 
and clarity of means. From this comes the partiality for beautiful sans such as 
the Futura and the Gill Sans. 
249 