• 
UNKNOWN COLOUR 
man and has been carried to a high pitch or de\'elopnH.: nL It is strange th.ll ih 
sister art of colour has been left in its primitive state. It is on!) in the l.tst flft) 
years that its potency has begun to stir in the minds of artists. 'l he sL.tk of 
colour is visible in nature in the R ainbow and the Prism. Light is one, and< ,\11 
be seen and thought of as one. By prismatic action it ca n be broken into it-; 
component rays, each one a distinct colour. Reel , orange, )'ello\1\, green, blue, 
violet- a scale line ascending and descending from reel hot to violet cold. 
But as well as being a line it has a quality also of being a circle ofrh) thmic 
change. One can see if one looks intently enough below the hot red a ccri\C 
which merges into harmony with the violet, and next to that violet"' i than almost 
imperceptible glow of magenta pink which echoes that cerise. This affinit} is 
perceived when one considers that one can have a red with more or less violet 
in it-and a violet with more or less pink or rose in it. But one cannot have a 
green with the least bit of either red or violet in it. It can also be seen in nature 
in the wave-like sequence of double and treble rainbows, following the bright 
arc of the first rainbow. Music differs from colour in this: you cannot ha\'e a 
sound in which all musical notes are contained. In the simplicity of the great 
white light all colour lives. 
Any true colour picture gives out light like a lamp. In twilight it looks like 
a luminosity-in a better light the differences in the colours begin to tell, and 
they grow more and more distinct, markedly individual, as the light intensifies, 
to fall back again into a luminosity, a glow if the light wanes. It is only in the 
clearest, most unclouded light of the sun that you can see the greatest attenua­
tion and differences of hue. The same yellow is quite a different colour on a 
clear grey day than it is on a day of :Niediterranean sunshine. So, the scale of 
colour is held within the fullness of sunlight, which is forever breaking apart, 
revealing its diverse hues, contrasts and affinities and then closing again upon 
this scale in the oneness of white light. 
Further, the colour depends not only upon the quality and quantity of the 
source oflight, but upon the capacity of our human eyes to receive that colour. 
We do not know whether the eyes of one individual see the same colour as the 
eyes of another individual, and we have no means of ever knowing this. It has 
been thought that the eyes of primitive man saw only the bright colours at the 
base of the spectrum, reds and oranges, and that only as our civilization ad­
vanced our eyes came to see the range of colour we now see. \Vhether this be so 
or not it is certain that at moments oflow vitality, however bright the sunlight 
may be, one sees only dimly the differentiation of colour, one sees light and its 
58 