THE STATE OF TRANSITION 
choice between alternatives, moves instinctively towards simplicity and econ­
omy. Even the painter and the sculptor, freed as they are from expression 
'through machine technique', have, in non-figurative work, abandoned the 
accidental for the exact and have replaced the ornamental by the construc­
tional. The fact that the various arts have independently evolved a contem­
porary formal vocabulary is evidence of a step in the transitional phase towards 
cultural unity. It is important to add that the elements which these arts have 
in common (non-figurative form, impersonal technique) they have received 
separately from their common background and have evolved within the limits 
of their own materials. Each art maintains its own scale of values; in the case of 
painting, the thrust and tension of balanced colour, in the case of sculpture the 
play of forces and volumes in space. 
It is as well to remind ourselves that in adopting a principle similar to 
that which has by common consent proved universal in the abstract art of 
architecture, non-figurative painting and sculpture does not necessarily sacri­
fice its 'human' appeal. But it may be true to say that it avoids the 'personal' 
element in order to make its 'human' appeal more profound, and that it has 
abandoned 'realism' only in its effort to get a firmer hold on 'reality' itself. 
In this respect it is important to recognize that the building of a new 'reality' 
is a task not confined to modern art alone. It is a matter of common know­
ledge that in science, the world of 'appearances', of parallel systems in which 
the dead world and the world of living organisms are clearly marked off from 
each other, has been abandoned. The world of appearances has given place 
to a world in which things unrelated to each other in appearance are united 
in the completeness of a single system. In science as in art, 'appearance' has 
been jettisoned in favour of a world discovered only through the penetration 
of appearances. 
The parallel is a significant one and may, perhaps, be extended into the 
field of architecture where the rapid advance of constructional science which 
began in the engineering structures of the nineteenth century exploded the 
belief in appearances at an early stage.* It is now well known that strength 
*The key inventions of the nineteenth century are well enough known; it is enough to say 
that this remarkable advance of constructional technique shows no sign of abating. Leaving on 
one side all the new material which science promises to provide in the very near future, one 
may mention because of the immecliate possibility of its application the work of the French 
engineer, M. Freyssinet, whose recent studies, based on the laws of molecular attractions, have 
provided a 'treated' reinforced concrete ten times stronger than ordinary reinforced concrete, 
and which, when fissured under pressure, possesses a molecular activity '"'hich will actually 
re-seal the lips of the fissures, so that the concrete returns to its normal strength. 
217 