• 
TOWN PLANNING 
By E. Maxwell Fry 
I CANNOT see that the art of town planning is in any real sense diflerent from 
architecture. Town planning as practised in England today is the counterpart 
of the architecture from which it sprang; is either sentimental or commercial­
or is no more than a petty human activity, a habit brought recurrently to mind 
through being printed clearly in a Parliamentary book of rules. 
It may be that what is called <national planning' is beyond the capabilities 
of our presently constituted society, and that this thought which I know tor­
ments many of us, this idea of a society so at peace with itself as to organize on 
a grand and moving scale the background of its living over wide surfaces of the 
earth, is a delusion that fogs the realization of a more even advance towards it. 
Yet between the largest possible conception of a planned world and the smallest 
part of modern architecture there is a correspondence. There springs and there 
moves a feeling of certainty that however great the demand made upon it by 
contemporary society, modern architecture could answer out of its vocabulary, 
and give even more than was demanded. 
In a sense this is all that is necessary, or possible: to have an architecture 
capable of anything. The eighteenth century had it, in that its architecture was 
something in course of slow evolution and therefore well understood and prac­
tised with confidence not only by the best but by the common run of architects; 
and by reason of the fact that its spirit permeated society. Further, there was 
little from among all the needs of society that could not be well satisfied by this 
architecture which found its right materials to hand and was neither strained 
by, nor in its turn strained, the economic or mechanical resources of its time. 
What is happening today is just such another confluence. At close quarters 
the picture is exact and the parts to scale. But in the large nothing is so clear, 
because though it is possible for individuals to see and to decide, nothing so 
190 