THE DEATH OF THE MONUMENT 
a toilet, now with a 'restoration' in the barbarous manner of the Victorian 
restorers. On the contrary, if the city is to escape being a museum, what 
belongs to the past must either be put into a museum or be transformed as a 
whole into a museum-set aside; put to the special uses of education but Ito 
longer lived in. 
The very value of the art museum and the museum of social history lies in 
this act of detachment. By confining the function of preservation to the mu­
seum, it releases space in the rest of the city for the fresh uses oflife. vVhere the 
fragments of a local culture are to be preserved, the best means of effecting this 
is perhaps by the use of a local building, such as the Taft Museum in Cincin­
nati, the Behn Haus and the St. Annen Kloster in Lubeck, and the Historical 
Museum in Edinburgh. The museum gives us a means of coping with the past, 
of having intercourse with other periods and other modes of life, without con­
fining our own activities to the mould created by the past. Starting itself as a 
chance accumulation of relics, with no more rhyme or reason than the city itself, 
the museum at last presents itself to use as a means of selectively preserving the 
memorials of culture: here at last is a real escape for the monument. What can­
not be kept in existence in material form, we may now measure, photograph in 
still and in moving pictures, and summarize in books and papers: we may­
and should- do this at a time when the life is still present, so that we shall have, 
filed away for future reference, not merely an image of the shell, but a working 
knowledge of the physiology of the building or the work of art. 
As far as works of pure art go, this detachment may become complete: 
what makes a work of art eternal in the human sense is not what it carries over 
in the setting of its own generation, but what it signifies against the background 
of our own experience. It follows that while the social museum must necessarily 
seek to preserve the background, the museum of art properly speaking should 
I. 
forego any such attempt: one does not need a mediaeval house to appreciate a 
picture by Roger van der Weyden or Breughel the Elder, nor does one need a 
French salon to find sensual pleasure in a Fragonard or sober respect in a Char­
din: indeed, the more complete the detachment, the more effectively we can 
screen a symbol from what it meant to another generation, the more specific 
and final is our own response. For a work of art is not a monument: if it has 
life at all, it exists as a contemporary fact: a museum, properly designed, with 
ample facilities for storage and preservation as well as for show, serves to en­
large the circle of contemporary experience. But our intercourse with the past 
is selective: it cannot be otherwise. The encyclopaedic culture of the metropolis, 
267 