• 
THE WORK OF THE C.I.A.M. 
ing the passage from 1\1arseilles lo Athens and back (29th .Jul> to 1oth August, 
I 933) · 
The previous Congress methods of illustrations on screens and <1 published 
commen tary could not be applied to the problem of the 'Functional To" n '. 
The technical difficulty alone was great; towns as clifTerenl as Los .\n14clcs, Ber­
lin, Zurich or D essau obviously were difficult to illustrate in cl ra\\ ing-s to the 
same scale and to reproduce in one and the same publication. The organism of 
a town actually requires a much more elaborate treatment than is possible by 
the simple reproduction of plans. These necessary changes of method explain 
why the first publication dealing with the comparative town structures could 
not appear as rapidly as those of previous congresses. A further reason is the 
indifference with which C.I.A.M. has been received by the authorities; 
C.I.A.l\L has received financial support from Swiss sources. It is now time for 
other countries, too, to raise funds and to facilitate this work, particularly in 
England and America, where the problems with which C.I.A.l'vL is concerned 
have recently been taken up. 
International Collaboration. Nothing is more difficult !oday than international 
collaboration. At Congresses where each member puts forward his own experi­
ence within a special sphere of work, understanding is not difficult. Each one 
speaks about his own affairs: the others do or do not listen. But C.I.A.l\1. tries 
as far as possible to eliminate personal work. The concern of the work of the 
Congresses is with problems which the individual cannot solve by himself. Only 
this can lead to directives which are generally valid. 
Each one of us has to pass through a difficult apprenticeship before it is 
possible to adapt one to the other all the different cultures with all their com­
mon conceptions of architectural questions. But in attempting this each one 
has extended and deepened his own understanding. 
Language is still a barrier. The Middle Ages, under the supremacy of the 
Church, had Latin as a means of universal understanding. We have twice ap­
plied to the Institut de Corporation Intellectuelle at Paris to demand that the 
same technical and artistic language should be taught in the schools of all 
countries, first from La Sarraz (I 928) and second from on board the Patris 
(I 3th August, I 933), both times on the initiative of Le Cor busier and both 
times in vain. 
The CIRPAC Meeting at La Sarraz:, 9th to I Ith September, 1926. Eight years 
after its foundation, Madame de Mandrot put the Chateau La Sarraz once 
again at the disposal of C.I.A.l\1. The Congresses form an organism which can 
274 