purely personal standards were applied and matters of universal concern 
were dismissed as individual fancy. This excessively subjective attitude 
of the recipient reacted upon many artists in such a way that they grad­
ually forgot how to produce the essential, the work with a biological basis 
and, their purpose instead now being to 'create works of art', they seized 
upon the trivial, the unimportant and often upon aesthetic formulae 
derived historically or subjectively from the great individual works. The 
opposition which emerged to this decline of painterly creation (Cubism, 
Constructivism) tried to purify the expressional elements and means them­
selves without intending to produce 'art' in the process. 'Art' comes 
into being when expression is at its optimum, i.e. when at its highest in-
. tensity it is rooted in biological law, purposeful, unambiguous, pure•). 
The second way consisted in an attempt to bring together into one entity 
singular works or separate fields of creation that were isolated from one 
another. This entity was to be the 'Gesamtkunstwerk', architecture, 
the sum of all the arts. (The De Stijl Group, Holland; first period of the 
Bauhaus.) The concept of a total work of art was readily intelligible, 
yesterday, at the period when specialisation was at its height. With its 
ramifications and its fragmenting action in every field, specialisation had 
destroyed all belief in the possibility of embracing the totality of all 
fields, the wholeness of life. Since, however, the Gesamtkunstwerk is only 
an addition, albeit an organised one, we cannot be satisfied with it today. 
What we need is not the 'Gesamtkunstwerk', alongside and separated from 
which life flows by, but a synthesis of all the vital impulses spontaneously 
forming itself into the all-embracing Gesamtwerk (life) which abolishes all 
isolation, in which all individual accomplishments proceed from a biolo­
gical necessity and culminate in a universal necessity. 
The principal task of the next period will have to be to create each work 
in conformity with its own laws and its own distinctive character. The 
unity of life cannot emerge when the boundaries of the works created are 
•) Children's drawings, as far as the child itself is concerned, are usually optimal productions. 
This optimum is therefore relative. In contrast to this, the work of an artist, a man 'in the 
deepest sense' creative, is an optimum not only for himself alone, but for the generality, for 
humanity, because by enriching everything, it carries contents which, but for the work, 
could scarcely have been brought into our experience with similar intensity. 
17 