objective but also expressive portraits; (p. 94-99) 
publicity; poster ; political propaganda; (p. 106-113) 
creative means for photo-books, i.e., photographs in place of 
text; typo photo; (p. 38 and 124- 137) 
creative means for two- or three-dimensional non-objective 
absolute I ig ht-projections; 
simu ltaneous cinema, etc., etc. 
The potentialities of the film include reproducing the dynamic of differ­
ent movements; scientific and other observations of a functional, chemical 
type; quick and slow motion pictures; radio profected film newspaper. 
The consequences of exploiting these potentialities include: the develop­
ment of education, criminology, the whole news-servic.e and much else. 
What a surprise it would be if, for example, it were possible to film a man 
daily from birth to his death in old age. It would be most unnerving even 
to be able to watch only his face with the slowly changing expressioh of a 
long life and his growing beard, etc., all in 5 minutes; or the statesman, the 
musician, the poet in conversation and in action; animals, plants, etc. 
about their vital functions; here microscopic observation will reveal the 
profoundest connections. Even with a proper understanding of the 
material, speed and breadth of thought do not suffice to predict 
all the obvious potentialities. 
In order to suggest by way of illustration one of the uses, I show a few 
photoplastics (p. 108-110). They are pieced together from various photo­
graphs and are an experimental method of simultaneous representation; 
compressed interpenetration of visual and verbal wit; weird combinations 
of the most realistic, imitative means which pass into imaginary spheres. 
They can, however, also be forthright, tell a story; more veristic 'than life 
itself'. It will soon be possible to do this work, at present still in its in­
fancy and done by hand, mechanically with the aid of projections and new 
printing processes. 
To some extent this is already done in current film practice: transillumina­
tion; one scene carried over into another; superimposition of different 
scenes. The iris and other diaphragms can be variously set to link together 
disconnected parts of events by means of a common rhythm. One sequence 
36 