• 
What is typophoto? 
Typography is communication composed in type. 
Photography is the visual presentation of what can be optically apprehen­
ded. 
Typophoto is the visually most exact rendering of communication . 
• 
Every period has its own optical focus. Our age: that of the film; the 
electric sign, simultaneity of sensorily perceptible events. It has given us a 
new, progressively developing creative basis for typography too. Guten­
berg's typography, which has endured almost to our own· day, moves ex­
clusively in the linear dimension. The intervention of the photographic 
process has extended it to a new dimensionality, recognised today as total. 
The preliminary work in this field was done by the illustrated papers, pos­
ters and by display printing. 
Until recently type face and type setting rigidly preserved a technique 
which admittedly guaranteed the purity of the linear effect but ignored the 
new dimensions of life. Only quite recently has there been typographic 
work which uses the contrasts of typographic material (letters, signs, 
positive and negative values of the plane) in an attempt to establish a cor­
respondence with modern life. These efforts have, however, done little to 
relax the inflexibility that has hitherto existed in typographic practice. 
An effective loosening-up can be achieved only by the most sweeping and 
all-embracing use of the techniques of photography, zincography, the 
electrotype, etc. The flexibility and elasticity of these techniques bring 
with them a new reciprocity between economy and beauty. With the 
development of photo-telegraphy, which enables· reproductions and accur­
ate illustrations to be made instantaneously, even philosophical works will 
presumably use the same means- though on a higher plane - as the present 
day American magazines. The form of these new typographic works will, 
of course, be quite different typographically, optically, and synoptically 
from the linear typography of today. 
Linear typography communicating ideas is merely a mediating makeshift 
link between the content of the communication and the person receiving it: 
COMMUNICATION ... TYPOGRAPHY ..... PERSON 
39 