further developed the importance of the time problem, which revolu­
tionised the whole existing aesthetic and formulated a scientifically 
precise set of problems (p. rrg). On an animation desk he photographed a 
sequence of movements built up from the simplest linear elements and, by 
correctly estimating developmental relationships in size, tempo, repetition, 
discontinuity, etc., tried to render the complexity which grows out of 
simplicity. His experiments at first borrowed from the complexities of 
musical composition, its division of time, regulation of tempo and its whole 
structure. But he gradually began to discover the vision-time element and 
thus his first work to be constructed as a drama of forms became an 
ABC of motion phenomena in chiaroscuro and variation of direction. 
In Eggeling's hands the original colour-piano became a new instrument 
which primarily produced not colour combinations but rather the arti­
culation of space in motion. His pupil Hans Richter has- so far only theor­
etically - emphasised the time-impulse even more strongly and has thus 
come near to . creating a light-space-time continuity in the synthesis of 
motion. This beginning, long out-dated in theory, has so far failed to 
handle 'light'. The effect of the works has been that of animated draw­
Ings. 
The next task: light films which could be shot continuously were in­
troduced in the form of the photogram (see pp. 71 to 78) as made by 
Man Ray and myself. The technical horizon of light-space articulation 
which had previously been difficult to obtain, was thereby widened. 
At the Bauhaus Schwerdtfeger, Hartwig and Hirschfeld-Mack worked with 
reflected light and shadow plays which in the overlapping and movement 
of coloured planes represent the most successful practical moving colour­
compositions yet. Hirschfeld-Mack's intensive work has produced equip­
rnent specially designed for shooting continuous film. He was the first to 
reveal the profusion of the most delicate transitions and unexpected 
variations of coloured planes in motion. A movement of planes, prismati­
cally controllable, which dissolves, conglomerates. His latest experi­
ments go far beyond this point, which resembles the colour-organ in char­
acter. The establishment of a new space-time dimension of radiating light 
and controlled movement becomes ever clearer in his spinning and plung­
ing bands of light. The pianist Alexander Laszlo has pursued a similar 
course with his 'colour-light music'. His experiment is somewhat 
21 