representational optical composition which will soon employ only mech­
anical and technical means - if we disregard the fact that these very 
works contain tradition-bound, often plainly reactionary elements . 
• 
In the photography of earlier days the fact was completely neglected that 
the light-sensitivity of a chemically prepared surface (glass, metal, paper, 
celluloid, etc.) was one of the basic elements of the photographic process. 
This surface was never related to anything other than a camera obscura 
obeying the laws of perspective, for fixing (reproducing) individualobjectsin 
their special character as reflectors or absorbers of light. Nor were the 
potentialities of this combination ever sufficiently consciously exploited. 
For if people had been aware of these potentialities they-would ·have been 
able with the aid of the photographic camera to make visible existences 
which cannot be perceived or taken in by our optical instrument, the eye; 
i.e., the photographic camera can either complete or supplement our optical 
instrument, the eye. This principle has already been applied in a few 
scientific experiments, as in the study of movements (walking, jumping, 
galloping) and of zoological, botanical and mineral forms (enlargements, 
microscopic photographs) and other investigations into natural history; 
but these experiments have remained isolated phenomena, the inter­
connections of which have notbeenestablished(p. 50 to 56). We have hith­
erto used the capacities of the camera in a secondary sense only (p. 57 to 
61). This is app.arent too in the so-called 'faulty' photographs: the view 
from above, from below, the oblique view, which today often disconcert 
people who take them to be accidental shots. The secret of their effect is 
that the photographic camera reproduces the purely optical image and 
therefore shows· the optically true distortions, deformations, foreshorten­
ings, etc., whereas the eye together with our intellectual experience, sup­
plements perceived optical phenomena by means of association and for­
mally and spatially creates a conceptual image. Thus in the photographic 
camera we have the most reliable aid to a beginning of objective vision. 
Everyone will be compelled to see that which is optically true, is explicable 
in its own terms, is objective, before he can arrive at any possible sub­
jective position. This will abolish that pictorial and imaginative asso­
ciation pattern which has remained unsuperseded for centuries and which 
has been stamped upon our vision by great individual painters. 
28 