artificially blurred into one another. Rather will unity have to be pro­
duced by conceiving and carrying out every creation from within its 
fully active and therefore life-forming propensity and fitness. Carried 
out by people whose view of life permits every individual to reach the 
highest productivity in his work as it bears on the whole, because he is 
allowed time and space to develop also those qualities which are most 
personal to himself. In this way man learns again to react to the slightest 
stimuli of his own being as well as to the laws of rna terial. 
On the basis of a theory of composition which says that a work of art 
should be created solely out of means proper to itself and forces proper to 
itself, the next step would be an architectonic composition arising as a 
synthesis out of the functional elements proper to architecture- therefore 
including material-colour - that is, out of the combination based on func­
tion of co-ordinated forces. Such composition would make it possible to 
obtain the desired colour-scheme of the rooms and building complexes 
without the collaboration of the painter in the modern sense, since func­
tional use of the building material: concrete, steel, nickel, artificial mater­
ials, etc., can unequivocally provide the colour-scheme of the room and 
of the whole architecture. On an ideal plane, where biological and tech­
nical functions meet, this is in fact the case. But practice shows that it i;; 
possible, indeed, even for later ages, very probably essential, to call in the 
'painter' - the expert - for the coloured details of the rooms. He will, 
admittedly, be able to work only within the delimitations arising out of 
the structural requirements. This means that there can be virtually no 
question of sovereign use of colour. If only because from now on colour 
will presumably be used in external architecture simply as an aid to or­
ganisation and in interior architecture to increase the effect of atmosphere 
and 'comfort'•). 
•) Colour in architecture helps to create a sense of comfort to suit the room and its occu­
pant. It thus becomes a coequal means of spatial composition which can be further supple­
mented by furniture and materials. The origin of contemporary experiments in painting the 
walls of rooms in different colours is as follows: 
The effect of rooms painted homogeneously is hard. There is too much self-emphasis in their 
uniform colour. In such a room the presence of the single colour, whatever it may be, is 
constantly with us. When, however, the various walls are painted in various harmonising 
18 