said that it was only able to use the most superficial characteristics of the new Cubist
works - works that could be seen in the Salons done by some of the old painters of
1911 who were showing more and more rarely, and also by some young painters who
were continuing in the same line of development. It used great surfaces painted to
emphasise their flatness, it syncopated continuous lines, it showed representational
silhouettes done using a very angular style of drawing, the colour was an imitation of
that of the Cubists. It never addressed itself directly to any of the true Cubist painters.
It used commercial artists, industrial designers, poster painters. And so we began to
see Cubist-style advertisements on the walls of our great cities, Cubist furnishing
fabrics, dresses, all sorts of objects in the big shops, more and more simplified
furnitures reduced to essential, stylised forms, whose exotic materials made a strange
contrast to this apparent commitment to austerity.
It is in this over-hasty and crude application of Cubist means, which has its own
importance in the history of Cubism, that I for one see a sign of what the future has in
store. Cubism was the first stage in an evolution away from a painting that was
essentially metaphysical (18) - reduced to the isolation of the easel painting,
necessary consequence of the cast of mind that had been established at the time of the
Renaissance - towards a physical painting, called upon to work in conjunction with
architecture. This will be imposed by the cast of mind which is being prepared and
which bears a strange resemblance to the Christian spirit, whose forms the Romantic
scholars were the first to rediscover.
The Cubism of 1911 had in effect begun a revaluation of the idea of form. It had, for
that very reason, to begin with a revaluation of the idea of the picture. What
prejudices there were in relation to this particular object! The habit of regarding the
picture as a spontaneous production of the artist was so deeply ingrained, the artist
appeared to be such an exceptional being, that it had become impossible to touch the
one without touching the other. To renounce the picture as an aim was, all at once, to
forget the artist, so that 'the picture-taboo' was at the same time a guarantee of
immunity for the artist himself (19).
 
PAINTING AND 'DECORATIVE PAINTING'
In Du "Cubisme", written in 1912, Jean Metzinger and myself tried to make a clear
distinction between the picture and decorative painting. We could not at that time
have understood that this distinction is determined by a change in the cast of mind of
the whole, and so we did no more than to try to define the two terms and draw out the
contrast that there is between them. It goes without saying that we declared the
picture to be superior. The subsequent development of Cubism was to lead us ever
deeper into what we had then thought was a cul de sac.
Cubism, in the changes it went through, was to show us that the nature of the picture
and the nature of decorative painting are no more dependent on our personal opinions
than they are on our personal tastes. Neither Chardin nor Cimabue could have
thought of making a choice between them. The cast of mind of the world in which
they lived imposed the picture on Chardin and decorative painting on Cimabue. Who
would dare to say, simply on the basis of their pictorial quality, that one of them is
worth less than the other? The cast of mind of the world about them and that alone
explains these particular ways in which painting appears, and renders one or other of
the two options impossible. Only intermediate ages such as our own imagine that
they have any choice in the matter - but that is only an illusion since, all the time, the
pressure is mounting, pushing us, despite all our hesitations and our distaste, in
whichever direction corresponds to the needs of the life of the age.