2 Paul Sérusier did, as it happens, claim on one occasion that he was the 'Father of
Cubism' Back
3 Metzinger knew Picasso, and wrote an article which refers to him in 1910. Back
 
 
4 Matisse used the word 'cubes' referring to paintings submitted by Braque to the
Salon d'Automne in 1908. Apollinaire used the word 'Cubism' in a review of the 1910
Salon d'Automne, in which he complains that Metzinger was imitating Picasso. But
Gleizes is right to say that the term was not yet in general use. Back
5 I sometimes translate Gleizes' word plastique by Coleridge's word esemplastic
(from eis en plattein -'to shape into one'), partly to avoid the modern connotations of
the word plastic, but also to affirm a continuity, which I believe to be valuable, with
Coleridge's line of thought. Back
6 Gleizes was engaged in a very heated controversy with the Dadaists in 1920,
despite, or perhaps because of, his earlier friendship with Marcel Duchamp and
Francis Picabia. He almost certainly has the Dadaists in mind here. Back
7 I remember that at this time I drew Sembat's speech to the attention of Gustav Kahn
[the Symbolist poet - translator], whom he had mentioned, and this brought about a
renewal of contact between the two men who had not seen each other for several
years. One unexpected consequence of this was, two years later, the collaboration of
Sembat and of Kahn in the Ministry of Public Works, the one as minister, the other as
head of his secretariat. Cubism has been useful in many ways. And I am persuaded
that an election to the academy such as that of Paul Valéry was only possible because
of the death-blow struck against anecdotal art by the Cubist painters. Back
8 Gleizes clearly has Picasso in mind. The particular case of Braque and Picasso is
discussed in more detail later in the essay. Back
9 Later, in, for example, the unpublished second part of La Forme et L'Histoire,
Gleizes would insist on the etymological definition of the word 'Universe' as the 'one
that turns. Back
10 The word object here signifies the external appearances of the thing represented.
Later Gleizes would insist that this should only be referred to as the subject. The
object is not something that the painter is copying but the real thing with which he is
engaged in the act of painting, i.e. the painting itself. Back
11 'La forme, modifiant ses directions, modifiait ses dimensions'. The meaning would
perhaps have been clearer if Gleizes had said 'changing its dimensions will change
the directions of its movement'. The schema of La Peinture et ses Lois show how
directions can be established on the basis of a repetition, at different levels of
magnitude, of the initial proportions of the surface to be painted. Back
12 The association of Gris and Metzinger is very important. Gris may have admired
Picasso more than he admired Metzinger, but there can be no doubt that his own
practice was closer to that of Metzinger and that, in the initial stages, (Gleizes is
generous in saying that Gris was 'there right from the beginning') he was following
Metzinger's lead. Back
13 An account of this 'patriotic' wartime campaign against Cubism is given in
Kenneth Silver's book, Esprit de Corps. Back
14 The main representative of this 'world of snobbery' making advances to the Cubist
painters was Cocteau. Cocteau was godson to Jules Roche, Mme Gleizes' father, and
had come to know Gleizes, through the still unmarried Juliette Roche, prior to the
war. Mme Gleizes claims that it was Gleizes who aroused Cocteau's interest in