These artists. especially Van Doesburg. continually and emphatically stated. both 
in theory and in practice, that their aim was absolute universality; the whole 
activity of the group was. however. in the end determined by this programmatic 
claim. The paintings of the De Stijl group- abstract based upon extreme limitation 
of the plastic vocabulary. composed of straight lines. the right angle. the three 
primary colours. and the three primary non-colours - are. like the first achitectura I 
designs and the early De Stijl sculpture. avowals of a universal harmony. To a very 
large extent this radically reduced vocabulary excludes individual effusions. so that 
by and large the work of the De Stijl group looks like a collective oeuvre. The De 
Stijl principles of universality are expressed particularly clearly in Van Doesburg's 
work. for between 1917 and 1920. he produced. besides painting, certain works 
which overlap into the field of architecture and sculpture; in 1919 he designed an 
abstract monument for Leeuwarden, while in 1920 he made architectural designs 
for Drachten. That his orientation. was universal became apparent during his stay 
in 1921 and 1922 in Germany, where his influence was far reaching, largely due to 
his Weimar lectures. 
To enumerate these activities- all of which tend in the same direction- is. how足
ever. by no means to exhaust the account of Van Doesburg's versatility. During the 
very years in which he was working to realize and to spread the ideas of De Stijl, 
he was labouring in his capacity of poet and essayist to create a platform for 
Dadaism in Holland. For the purpose of publishing his sound-poems and his 
polemical essays he took upon himself a second and third identity - the pseudonyms 
I. K. Bonset and Aldo Camini. He published Mecano. a Dadaist pamphlet which __ 
survived through three numbers, under his own name. 
During the following years Van Doesburg developed renewed interest in archi足
tecture. A commission from the Paris art-dealer Leonce Rosenberg brought together 
three members of De Stijl- Van Doesburg. Van Eesteren and Rietveld- on the work 
of preparing a series of projects for an artist's house and a private house. Like De Stijl 
painting in 1917. these projects were designed to reduce architecture to its elements; 
they put forward entirely new. revolutionary solutions to the questions of space. spa足
tial clarity. and order. The designs were exhibited in Paris and later in Weimar and 
Nancy. Rietveld's celebrated house in Utrecht dates from the same period and pro足
vided an opportunity of realizing much of what had been prepared in the projects. 
Van Doesburg's work in architecture. in balancing masses and in designing in 
71 