32 
aesthetic experience of reality or, one might also say, his creative experi­
ence of the fundamental essence of things. The visual artist can leave the 
repetition of stories, fairy-tales, etc., to poets and writers. The only way in 
which visual art can be developed and deployed is by revaluing and puri­
fying the formative means. Arms, legs, trees, and landscapes are not 
unequivocally painterly means. Painterly means are: colours, forms, 
lines, and planes. 
Taking the development of visual art as a whole, we can, in fact, see the 
means becoming increasingly clearly defined and providing the possibility 
of purely formative expression for the artistic experience. Since these 
formative means have made their appearance as the principal visible fac­
tor, everything in painting, sculpture, and, to some extent, in architecture 
which has no immediate place among the purely expressional means has 
been relegated to the background (Fig. 26). 
It is unnecessary to record every stage in the development of their 
importance in the evolution t owards an exact artistic expression• ). We 
may summarize all these various currents, whether or not they belong to 
systems as: the conquest of an exact expressional form of the aesthetic 
experience of reality . . 
The essence of the formative idea (of aesthetics) is expressed by the 
term cancellation. 
One element cancels out another. 
This cancelling out of one element by another is expressed in nature as 
well as in art. In nature, more or less concealed behind the accidents of 
the particular case, in art (at least in the exact, formative kind), clearly 
revealed. 
e ) I would refer those who are interested to: Von Monet zu Picasso, Max Raphael, Delphin-Verlag, Mun­
ich 19 13. M odem Painting, W . H . Wright, 1917. De nieuwe Beweging in de Schilderkunst, Theo van Does­
burg, J. \Valtman, jr., Delft 1915, and Classique-Baroque-Moderne, Edition de !'Effort Moderne, Paris 
1920. Neue Gestaltung, P . Mondrian, Bauhausbiicher 5, Albert Langen Verlag. 