his resolute conversion to abstraction. and was conversant with his aesthetic views 
as set forth ·in his book On the spiritual in art. 
The first world war - wh ich meant full mobilization for the neutral Netherlands­
interrupted the promising development of the young artist and critic. Thea van 
Doesburg was conscripted into the Frontier Guard: he served in the army from the 
summer of 1914 until mid - 191 6. His friendship with Antony Kok. whom he met 
and came to esteem during his military service. dates from this time. 
As soon as he was demobilized in 1916 Van Doesburg embarked upon intensive 
artistic activity, constantly embracing new spheres and possibilities of artistic 
work- an activity which persisted until his early death. It is characteri stic of him 
that he conducted architectural experiments alongside his painting . Van Doesburg's 
co llaboration with the architects J . J. P. Oud and Jan Wils. which found expression 
in the community of 'de Sphi nx·. dates from this first year of his free development. 
Friendly and artistic contact with Oud grew closer in 1917 when the two were 
working on Oud's villa at Noordwijkerhout. for the interior decoration of which 
Van Doesburg designed a number of coloured motifs. This intellectual climate -
a strong interest in architecture and at the same time an intensive preoccupation 
With painting in its most progressive strain - resulted in the founding of the De 
St1jl group. which may wel l be regarded as Thea van Doesburg's most important 
action and the most far-reaching from the point of view of cultu ra l history. 
A friendship had grown up between Thea van Doesburg and the painters Piet 
Mondrian and Bart van der Leek. who were then working in Laren ; Van Doesburg 
often visited them in their stud 1os and the three painters exchanged experiences. 
pooled their achievements. and in this way evolved a new style. On the strength of 
th1s. Van Does burg. together with Mondrian and the painter Vilmos Huszar. the 
architect J. J. Oud and the essayist Antony Kok. started the group ·De Stijl'. They 
were joined almost at the same time. 1917-18, by Bart van der Leek. the Belgian 
sculptor Georges Vantongerl oo, and the Dutch architects J an Wils and Robert 
van't Hoff. In August 1917 the 'De Stijl' group made its first public appearance with 
its journal of the same name. In November 1918 the first · De Stijl' manifesto appeared 
with its st1rring opening words: 'There is a consciousness which belongs to the 
old days and another wh1ch belongs to today. The old one is aligned with the 
individual. The new one is aligned with the universal. The struggle of the individual 
against the universal 1 s as apparent 1n the world war as it is in the art of our time.' 
70 