9 
between the artist and the community. Obviously this cannot be achieved 
without great difficulties, but these could be overcome were it not for a third 
cause which makes it almost impossible for the artist to address himself to 
the public, either directly through his work or indirectly by explanation. 
This third cause is official newspaper criticism. It derives from the 
extremely sketchy and subjective impressions of a few, mostly unintelli­
gent, lay people who possess an outmoded or hazily modern conception of 
painting. What this criticism lacks is method. When criticism of works of 
art lacks method, confusion must inevitably arise over the meaning of the 
modern visual art- for the personal impressions of Messrs A. and B. can 
render the public but little assistance. 
We have already repudiated this habit of reviewing works of art instead 
of elucidating them. Those who enjoyed doing so we called lay critics, not 
in order to offend them, but to define their true relationship to art and to 
the public. 
This type of art review should be rejected. First, because the artist, 
rather than the work of art, becomes the object of the review and secondly 
and, indeed, mainly, because a universally acceptable concept of ~for­
mation' (Gestaltung) and ~art' - and therefore any critical method - is 
alien to all these critiques. 
The modern artist desires no intermediary. He wishes to address himself 
to the public directly, through his work. If the public does not under­
stand him it is up to him to provide his own explanations. 
The main reason why the public is on the wrong tack where the new art 
is concerned lies in the irrelevance of lay criticism, which obscures with un­
clear clarifications the unprejudiced vision and experience of works of art. 
There is only one way to restore the unprejudiced way of looking, des­
troyed by the ignorance and complacency of traditional art criticism: 
elementary and universally intelligible principles of visual art 
must be established - which is what is attempted here. 