the animal for breeding and for milking; when the farmer calls the cow 
'beautiful', this 'beautiful' refers to the well-cared for appearance of the 
animal, its health, milk-producing qualities, size, etc. 
The veterinary surgeon has a different view: he will be mainly interested 
in everything that concerns the cow's state of health. He sees the animal 
from the point of view of the anatomist, the physiologist, etc. When he 
praises the animal it means that the cow is healthy, strong, well-built, etc. 
The cattle-dealer sees the cow as a commercial commodity. When he 
praises the animal it means that she will be a good seller and a profit足
maker. 
The butcher sees the cow primarily as so many pounds of meat, so many 
pounds of fat and x pounds of bones. 
Thus each of the various people looking at the cow sees her in a way 
which is related to his occupation and his talents. The personal exper足
ience of each determines for him the 'reality' of the cowe) . 
The painter sees but few of these features; certainly he too has a definite 
experience of his object , but it concerns other qualities in the animal; 
more general ones than those which strike the farmer, the cattle-dealer, 
the veterinary surgeon, etc. More general, because he perceives the same 
features in other objects too, although in entirely different relationships. 
The formative artist sees the cow also in combination with open space, 
the play of light on her flanks, he experiences the hollows and the prom足
inences as sculpture; he sees the parts of the body between the forelegs 
and the hind-legs not primarily as belly or breast but experiences them as 
tension. He sees the ground on which the animal stands as plane. He sees 
e ) If we were to adopt the p hilosophical standpoint we could say: the sum of the various relative exper足
iences would express t he absolute realit y. This, however, lies beyond the ra nge of experience available to 
the artist. Since our book is concerned with tracing o nly t he aesthetic reality, we will concern ourselves 
no further with the philosophical side of the enquiry. 