29 
The development of the visual arts is at bottom a continuous process of 
approximation (irregular and erratic) to the exact and real expression 
of the formative idea. In the course of the development towards concrete 
means for this real expression, the material comes to occupy an increas­
ingly prominent position. Thus sometimes in sculptures the unworked 
material remains visible and, indeed, forms a contrast to the represen­
tational forms which appear to grow out of it. This happened most often 
with the Impressionist sculptors (Fig. 23). In hnpressionist painting t oo 
the means become more apparent. In Impressionist and Post-Impression­
ist painting (use of bright, clear points of colour) the material appears as an 
essential part of the organism of the work of art, in contrast to the use of 
material in realist painting in which it is not an essential part of the organ­
ism but the means to an illusionist reproduction of the form, colour, and 
style of the subject represented and as such forfeits all its own significance. 
To take two examples: Franz Hals and R embrandt in their last periods, 
when they had come to experience the outward form of things more freely, 
that is, more creatively, and no longer clung anxiously to the obj ect, gave 
freer rein to their creative impulses and expressed their artistic experien­
ces rather by plastic use of the mat erial (impasto, colour laid on broadly, 
brush-strokes remaining visible). The artist gradually woke up t o the fact 
that the material could be used as the bearer of the content (Fig. 24). 
Every work of art shows whether the artist's relationship t o his subject 
was an active, creative one or an imitative, dependent one. If the former, 
the artistic idea enters visibly into the work despite the fact that it is ob­
scured by the arbitrary singularity of the subj ect . If the latter , the sub­
ject appears as the (apparent) double of the natural obj ect . 
The artist, and particularly the modern artist , sees nature creatively in 
that he gives form to his experience through pure artistic means, not 
arbitrarily, but according t o the logical laws of his branch of art (these 
laws are the means of controlling creative intuition). He therefore uses 