• 
TOWN PLANNING 
neYerthcless with its vital economy. It found, for instance, that c.u lier e'i:ploita­
tion had laid bare the earth to the winds and rains, and that clenud.llion and 
soil impoverization ''ere aiTecting not only farming but the value of the a1ea lm 
water-catchment purposes. And planting and soil reclamation mc.tnt brttt-r 
farming, more people and more money to spend on electrical enctg}. E' en -;o, 
a population with the heart taken out of it by years of poverty is a poor stock to 
battle for good things to come. Therefore they must be educated. And so it goc" 
on, spreading from a great dam, a work of technics, and entering the li\T'i of 
large numbers of people as a new idea ofliving. 
In England the solution must move in the same direction. I am con\ inced 
that approaches to planning that appeal for the preservation of ancient beaut}, 
for beautification of towns and so on- the well-worn paths of the Garden Cit) 
and the C.P.R.E.- defer the general acceptance of the possible 
11ovement, 
harmony existing between industrialization and human welfare, and the estab­
lishing of planning as a vital and securely based social activity. 
The idea is actually crystallizing out at both ends-in the machinery of 
national planning, however imperfect it may be at this stage; and in the pro­
gressively larger undertakings of housing authorities. The one deals with the 
organization of powers; the other with constructive planning on a smaller scale. 
But both are direct, and in essence practical. R egarding them as forming part 
in one gradually evolving planning structure, I am crediting them neither with 
similar nor equal purpose; still less am I attempting to judge of their quality. 
What seems to me important is to discover wherein lies the strength of the 
movement to plan land use. Is it attaching itself to the directing powers or be­
ing deflected anti-socially? Can large-scale housing, as it develops, bridge the 
gap between the two and become the instrument for the practical distribution 
of major economic power in the form of cheap social services in finely developed 
social structure? 
Any honest planner will admit that town planning as now practised lacks 
direction, and fails where it is most necessary that it should succeed. But the 
immediate answer presents us with the dilemma, evoked by the choice between 
• 
the danger of concentrated power and the stalemate of democratically controlled 
individualism. It is necessary to the evolution of town planning through modern 
architecture that we should look past the dilemma, and prepare blue prints for 
an urbanization within a structure of social planning, and having recognized the 
fact we may safely return to the study of housing as being a field most likely to 
yield results of service to the larger machinery of the all too clouded future. 
192 