THE FACULTY OF ABSTRACTION 
Gothic cathedral. The only problem is to discover methods of circumventing 
the intellect- of releasing the compensatory images of the unconscious in plas­
tic and poetic form. 
The method of the abstract artist is more direct. His aim is, in effect, to 
construct a plastic object appealing immediately to the senses and in no way 
departing from the affective basis of art, which shall nevertheless be the plastic 
equivalent of the concept- or, to use the dialectical term, its antithesis. Indeed 
we may go further and say that he accepts the position of absolute opposition 
between art and idea declared by Hegel, and proceeds to resolve the contra­
diction by creating the synthesis- the work of art which translates the concept 
back again into perceptual form, but retaining the unity of the original con­
cept. 
'Space', for example, is a typical concept. As a concept it is very evident 
in the work of a surrealist painter like Dali; Dali contradicts the rational con­
cept of space in a fantastic manner, giving to his picture what we might call 'a 
dream perspective'. This very contradiction of space makes us vividly aware 
of its reality. But an abstract artist like Mondrian attacks the same concept 
frontally. H e presents us with a bare arrangement of lines and two or three 
pure colours which create and affirm the concept 'space' in the most direct and 
unequivocal manner. The purer and more fundamental the elements which 
are used, the acuter and purer is our emotional awareness of 'space'. The very 
fact that naturalistic motives are excluded, and that a naturalistic quality like 
shading is not imitated, makes our physical awareness of the concept more 
direct, more exact. 
I do not suggest that all concepts can be treated in this manner. The word 
'dog' is a concept. If we picture a dog, it is always a particular breed of a dog, 
and perhaps only a surrealist could paint a conceptual dog, or give an adequate 
plastic equivalent of all that is implied when we use the symbolic word 'dog'. 
But actually we do not need such a plastic equivalent; it would, as we say, 
serve no useful purpose. The activity which modern art is engaged on, of trans­
lating concepts into plastic percepts (plastic objects which can be perceived), 
is determined by necessity- the necessity of our social evolution. At any stage 
in history (since the appearance of human consciousness) certain concepts are 
created or preferred, which concepts form the typical ideology of a period. If 
we are dialectical materialists we regard them as the reflection of that parti­
cular state of economic development. But essential to the creative life and de­
velopment of each period is the translation of these concepts into objects of 
65 