THE DEATH OF THE MONUMENT 
not be treated as a memorial to a person or an event: nor is it to deny that a 
contemporary building might easily last two hundred years, or even two thou­
sand years: that is not the point. \\'hat will make the hospital or air beacon a 
good memorial is the fact that it has been designed for the succour of those who 
are ill, or for the guidance of men piloting airplanes: not that it has taken form 
out of a metaphysical belief in fixity and immortality and in the positive cele­
bration of death. 
ere one must note a vast change in ideology: a real split. 1 n most civiliza­
H
tions the activities of the living are not real unless they can be transposed into 
terms of death: in our civilization death is meaningless unless it can be trans­
posed into terms of the living. In Christian culture life was a preparation for 
death, that is, for after life: in our emerging civilization, death is a making way 
for life, and all the fixed and memorial processe<;, the \vri t ten record, the 
painting, the sculptured stone, the photograph, the recorded voice, are offer­
ings to the living- to be accepted, not out of a duty to the dead, but out of a 
loyalty to other remoter generations capable of deriving life from them, even 
if closer ones cannot. 
The death of the monument has been intuiti\·cly forecast by more than 
one spirit during the last century; for the fact is that it has implications that 
go beyond the conception of individual tombs, memorials, or public buildings: 
it affects the character of our civilization and the design of the city as a whole. 
Why should each generation go on living in the quarters that were built by its 
ancestors, in quarters many of which are stale and dirty, most of them planned 
for other uses and other modes oflife, a good part of them mere makeshifts even 
for the purposes for which they were originally intended? It was Nathaniel 
Hawthorne who asked this question: he put it into the mouth of the young 
photographer in the House of the Seven Gables and repeated it elsewhere; and it 
is only now perhaps that one can see its full significance. Our cities, planned as 
monuments, made of permanent materials, with heavy capital investments, 
duly incorporated under capitalism in the existing mortgages and land values, 
are incapable of adjustment to fresh needs and fresh demands; and what is true 
for the city as a whole is true likewise of its individual houses. 
\\'e have created for the community as a whole physical shells, \\'hen \Vhat 
we need is not so much shells as organic bodies capable of circulation and re­
newal in every part of their tissues. The protective function of the city, ten­
dencies toward fixities and permanence of function, have been overdone: for a 
living creature the only real protection and permanence comes through growth 
265 