• 
SCULPTURE: CARVING AND 
sponds to their emotional impulses. Every single shape made 'absolute' ac­
quires a life of its own, speaks its own language and represents one single emo­
tional impact attached only to itself. Shapes act, shapes influence- our pc;) chc, 
shapes are events and Beings. Our perception of shapes is tied up \\ith ou1 per­
ception of existence itself. The emotional con tent of an absolute shape is unique 
and not replaceable by any other means a t the command of our spiritual f,lcul­
ties. The emotional force of an absolute shape is immediate, irresistible and 
universal. It is impossible to comprehend the content of an absolute shape by 
reason alone. Our emotions are the real manifestation of this content. By the 
influence of an absolute form the human psyche can be broken or moulded. 
Shapes exult and shapes depress, they elate and make desperate; they order and 
confuse, they are able to harmonize our psychical forces or to disturb them. 
They possess a constructive faculty or a destructive danger. In short, absolute 
shapes manifest all the properties of a real force having a positive and a nega­
tive direction. 
The constructive mind which animates our creative impulses enables us to 
draw on this inexhaustible source of expression and to dedicate it to the service 
of sculpture, at the moment when sculpture was in a state of complete ex­
haustion. I dare to state, with complete confidence in the truth of my assertion, 
that only through the efforts of the Constructive Idea to make sculpture ab­
solute did sculpture recover and acquire the new force necessary for it to under­
take the task which the new epoch is going to impose on it. 
The critical condition in which sculpture found itself at the end of the last 
century is obvious from the fact that even the rise of naturalism through the 
growth of the impressionist movement was not able to awaken sculpture from 
its lethargy. The death of sculpture seemed to everybody inevitable. It is not 
so any more. Sculpture is entering on a period of renaissance. It again assumes 
the role which it formerly played in the family of the arts and in the culture of 
peoples. Let us not forget that all the great epochs at the moment of their 
spiritual apogee manifested their spiritual tension in sculpture. In all great 
epochs when a creative idea became dominant and inspired the masses it was 
sculpture which embodied the spirit of the idea. I t was in sculpture that the 
demoniac cosmology of the primitive man was personified; it was sculpture 
which gave the masses of Egypt confidence and certainty in the truth and the 
omnipotence of their King of Kings, the Sun; it was in sculpture that the 
Hellenes manifested their idea of the manifold harmony of the world and their 
optimistic acceptance of all its contradictory laws. And do we not find completed 
II 0 