• 
THE CONDITION OF ARCHITECTURE AND 
The anS\\ er, then, to the quest ion ho\\ '' e can regain a l rue folk <ll cIt i 1 ('C­
ture remains a sociological or political one. But the JXOccc;s b) \\hie h om m,·n 
confused and selfconscious individualism could be transformed into an unsclf­
conscious vernacular can be observed in advance and, indeed, initiated n en 
'' ithin the limitations of our present political cond ition. Some cle~ree of cu l­
tural readjustment, that is to say, can be undertaken, as it '"as carl) in the 
nineteenth century, in advance of the new sociological and spiritual impulse 
necessary for it to become wholly effective. In the nineteenth century the socio­
logical era that the engineers foreshadowed never materialized and the \ crna­
cular tradition they established was lost. The process of transition can be very 
clearly visualized-and this is where the observations that we have made about 
the Middle Ages, the eighteenth century and the early nineteenth century apply 
to our own problems: the process can be visualized because this quality of anony­
mity which we have isolated as a virtue (or as the direct concomitant of a con­
dition of virtue) is closely related to the qualities the design of the present day 
already possesses of its own nature. 
The characteristic qualities of the machine aesthetic, "'·hich is our present­
day aesthetic, have often been defined. They are lucidly set out by Lewis 11um­
ford in his book, Technics and Civilization. They include an acceptance, indeed 
an exploitation, of mass-production: the multiplication of standard patterns, 
implying the elimination of personality from the process of manufacture. They 
include therefore the disappearance of the handicraft respect for technical vir­
tuosity, and respect for rarity as such. They include also the acceptance of a 
new formal vocabulary, derived from the needs of machine production and 
influenced by the example of machines themselves. 
Now all these qualities that the art of a machine age naturally possesses are 
impersonal qualities. In fact such tradition of machine art as there is, is already 
an anonymous one. Its vocabulary owes nothing to the designer's hand, and 
though his personality enters into the initial business of formal selection within 
the limits of functional necessity, even this is partly determined by the standard 
type forms- the anonymous traditions- that the machine age already begins 
to evolve. 
Therefore, although it may appear that, in concentrating on the re-estab­
lishment of the anonymous tradition, we are putting the cart before the horse: 
anticipating the social unity of which this anonymity is supposed only to be the 
evidence, it is clear that each, to a certain degree, can contribute to the other. 
A ready acceptance of the new impersonal vernacular that the machine art 
188 