PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
form. By offering him a freedom of choice the relations of dimension present the 
artist with one of the most difficult problems. And the closer he approaches the ulti­
mate consequence of his art the more difficult is his task. 
Since the constructive elements and their mutual relations form an in­
separable unity, the laws of the relations govern equally the constructive ele­
ments. These, however, have also their own laws. I t is obvious that one cannot 
achieve the same expression through different forms. But it is often forgotten 
that varied forms or lines achieve- in form- altogether different degrees in the evolu-
• 
tion of plastic art. Beginning with natural forms and ending with the most ab-
stract forms, their expression becomes more profound. Gradually form and line gain 
in tension. For this reason the straight line is a stronger and more profound 
expression than the curve. 
In pure plastic art the significance of different forms and lines is very im­
portant; it is precisely this fact which makes it pure. 
In order that art may be really abstract, in other words, that it should not 
represent relations with the natural aspect of things, the law of the denaturaliza­
tion of matter is of fundamental importance. In painting, the primary colour that 
is as pure as possible realizes this abstraction of natural colour. But colour is, 
in the present state of technique, also the best means for denaturalizing matter 
in the realm of abstract constructions in three dimensions; technical means 
are as a rule insufficient. 
All art has achieved a certain measure of abstraction. This abstraction has 
become more and more accentuated until in pure plastic art not only a trans­
formation of form but also of matter- be it through technical means or through 
colour-a more or less neutral expression is attained. 
According to our laws, it is a great mistake to believe that one is practising 
non-figurative art by merely achieving neutral forms or free lines and deter­
minate relations. For in composing these forms one runs the risk of a figurative 
creation, that is to say one or more particular forms. 
Non-figurative art is created by establishing a dynamic rhythm of determinate 
mutual relations which excludes the formation of any particular form . We note thus, that 
to destroy particular form is only to do more consistently what all art has done. 
The dynamic rhythm which is essential in all art is also the essential ele­
ment of a non-figurative work. In figurative art this rhythm is veiled. 
Yet we all pay homage to clarity. 
The fact that people generally prefer figurative art (which creates and 
finds its continuation in abstract art) can be explained by the dominating 
49 