ART AND THE SCIENTIST 
By J. D. Bernal 
O NE of the features of the civilization out of which we are now passing was its 
rigid separation of human functions into different spheres. Every man tended 
to have a job, to be a specialist in something. T he great branches of human 
culture seemed to move further and further apart. In particular, art and science 
became two entirely separate spheres which did not even touch at any point. 
The last official link was the annual reviews of the Royal Academy which used 
to be given in Nature, and in which the academicians were chided for putting 
the moon the wrong way up in the sky or for painting a flower with too many 
petals. But even these have now been discontinued, and for the official scientist 
a picture or statue might just as well not exist. It had not always been so. In the 
great creative periods of science the artists and the scientists worked very 
closely together and were in many cases the same people. It was to the interest 
in the visual arts that we owe the birth of accurate observation of nature. It was 
the problems of architecture that gave rise to the science of mechanics. Leo­
nardo da Vinci, though the greatest, was only typical of whole schools of artist­
scientists. Gradually, however, with the development of bourgeois culture the 
useful and the ornamental were piously separated. Science was used to make 
the money, art simply as a means of spending it. The result of this separation 
has been the most incredible mutual ignorance. The scientist totally ignores 
art, the artist works as if science had never existed. Yet, particularly at the 
present day, both have to learn from one another enormously. The whole mod­
ern movement in art did, in fact, originate not only from the revulsion of the 
artists to the lavish and aimless materialism of nineteenth-century painting and 
sculpture, but also from a slight inkling that the problems of perspective and 
natural colouring which they had inherited from the artist-scientists of the 
Renaissance were not the only problems for the artist and that the more recent 
119 