• 
THE STATE OF TRANSITION 
the great practical advantages of standardization, but, through l.H k of a 
balancing social and aesthetic consciousness, has by its applic.llion of st,tndanl­
ization debased human environment in the creation or the industrial -dum. 
Building today (as manifested particularly in the output or the c; pc< ul.tti' c 
builder) illustrates this cultural disintegration at its lm" est ebb. ,\ c; an inhet i­
tance from the nineteenth century, it maintains a basic opposition a parti,d 
acceptance of the new world in the sphere of technique (machine production ) 
and a contradiction of its existence in the form (imitation of ea rlier handiu aft 
styles). 
The origin of this separation of form and technique rests, of course, in the 
romantic outlook which sees the machine essentially as a creator of ugliness- a 
dehumanising agent. It 'Nould be useless to deny that there is some truth in 
this belief; the examples of misapplication are unfortunately all too we1l 
known. But it is also equally false to deny the machine's potentialities as a 
of enrichment to human life; and the separation of art and tech­
source 
nique in the nineteenth century is, at root, the equivalent of that denial. 
From the point of view of art, the disaster is that in creating its own sepa­
rate and independent world, it loses contact with life, and not only this, 
it fails also to exercise its proper function as a controlling influence. The 
denial of the mechanical environment by the world of art did not stop its 
development (which was in any case assured by the practical advantages in­
troduced), it merely left the machine unmastered, uncontrolled and at liberty 
to do its worst. 
It is now possible to see what that \,vorst may be. Acres of jerrybuilding 
have demonstrated the chaos inherent in an art form which has no connection 
with contemporary methods of production and which is now tudor, now 
georgian, now 'modernistic'. The new technique, instead of being the means 
of a cultural advance, has merely mass produced this artificial 'art'. It has 
now been proved that 'the only possible departure for artistic creation is 
modern life', and that life includes all contemporary realities. The balancing 
and controlling counterpart to a contemporary technique is an equally con­
temporary aesthetic. The aesthetic corresponding to the machine technique is 
no longer a matter for speculation. The new aesthetic exists in the motor car 
and the aeroplane, in the steel bridge and the line of electric pylons. Its values, 
precision, economy, exact finish, are not merely the result of technical limita­
tion. They are the product of artistic selection. The modern architect and the 
industrial designer, confronted at every point in the technical process with the 
216 