ROUTES OF HOUSING ADVANCE 
The first motor-car models were developed by tinkering little mechanics, 
not by strong companies nor under gigantic financial risks. They were scarcely 
in conflict with accepted mass standards. The grandparents of most car owners 
of today did not use any private vehicles of transportation, and so there existed 
no sentimental relation to the problem. 
The well-integrated, standardized prefabricated, not built but assembled, 
house is in conflict with mass prejudice, which, as we know, first would have to be 
dissolved. Obliging concessions to individualistic formal diversification threaten 
the manufacturer with economic failure. Model consciousness would have to be 
created in consumers as has been done in the automotive field. The shop-made 
house cannot be camouflaged, without losing prefabrication advantages. 
The tinkering little auto-mechanic of I 895 has perhaps his parallel in the 
experimental architect-engineer, who today invests his energy in the problem 
of truly advanced dwelling construction and its appendages. His heart-break­
ing small-scale efforts pave the way to an increasing confidence on the part of 
an increasing fraction of consumers. Each of his exemplary executions which, 
while individually put up, easily prove themselves applicable to series fabrica­
tion and shop preparation, gains the interest of manufacturers in neighbourly 
fields of production. Each publicity success of his work brings the hesitant capi­
tal interests a step closer to financing this experiment. The illusion of mass 
acceptance which he paints becomes a reality in more and more single instances. 
Recognizing many years ago the factors described above, we have faithfully 
endeavoured to give a good number ofindividualjobs entrusted to us a charac­
ter which easily would lend itself to series production. We further attempted to 
introduce meritorious materials in which strongly entrenched manufacturing 
interests are invested. This is opening a vista on new markets for steel in forms 
applicable to light-weight dwelling construction, for Diatom, asphalt, etc. 
We have combed the neighbourhood of the housing field to demonstrate 
the advantages of typification, there, where fewer prejudices resist it. Stan­
dardization of the elementary school, for example, of the 'drive-in' retail 
market, of the highway auto court and restaurant, the vacation cabin, muni­
cipal beach resorts, motor-service stations. A special study has been carried out 
to attack with the practice of prefabrication such dwelling problems as offer 
obvious difficulties in usual field construction: distance from supply sources of 
skilled labour and construction equipment; unwillingness ofloaning institutions 
to give financial support and to take risks on thus handicapped projects. 
Illustrations show efforts of proving the applicability of mill-prepared unit-
209 