PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
Intuition enlightens and so links up with pure thought. They together be­
come an intelligence which is not simply of the brain, which does not calculate, 
but which feels and thinks. Which is creative both in art and in life. From this 
intelligence there must arise non-figurative art in which instinct no longer 
plays a dominating part. Those who do not understand this intelligence regard 
non-figurative art as a purely intellectual product. 
Although all dogma, all preconceived ideas, must be harmful to art, the 
artist can nevertheless be guided and helped in his intuitive researches by 
reasoning apart from his work. If such reasoning can be useful to the artist and 
can accelerate his progress, it is indispensable that such reasoning should ac­
company the observations of the critics who talk about art and who wish to 
guide mankind. Such reasoning, however, cannot be individual, which it usual­
ly is; it cannot arise out of a body of knowledge outside plastic art. If one is not 
an artist oneself one must at least know the laws and culture of plastic art. If the 
public is to be well informed and if mankind is to progress it is essential that 
the confusion which is everywhere present should be removed. For enlighten­
ment, a clear demonstration of the succession of artistic tendencies is necessary. 
Hitherto, a study of the different styles of plastic art in their progressive suc­
cession has been difficult since the expression of the essence of art has been 
veiled. In our time, which is reproached for not having a style of its own, the 
content of art has become clear and the different tendencies reveal more clearly 
the progressive succession of artistic expression. Non-figurative art brings to an 
end the ancient culture of art; at present therefore, one can review and judge 
more surely the whole culture of art. We are not at the turning-point of this cul­
ture; the culture of particular form is approaching its end. The culture of determined 
relations has begun. 
It is not enough to explain the value of a work of art in itself; it is above all 
necessary to show the place which a work occupies on the scale of the evolution of plastic 
art. Thus in speaking of art, it is not permissible to say 'this is how I see it' or 
'this is my idea'. True art like true life takes a single road. 
The laws which in the culture of art have become more and more deter­
minate are the great hidden laws of nature which art establishes in its own fashion . It 
is necessary to stress the fact that these laws are more or less hidden behind the 
superficial aspect of nature. Abstract art is therefore opposed to a natural re­
presentation of things. But it is not opposed to nature as is generally thought. It is 
opposed to the raw primitive animal nature of man, but it is one with true 
human nature. It is opposed to the conventional laws created during the cul-
47 