• 
A NOTE ON BIOT ECH NI CS 
ported in the other direction as well. This is inC\ itablc, for there is no v. a1 of 
m·oicling it. The resultant form is one of the most constant in natu1 c. It is a 
shaping b) natural forces at which man arrives by intuition, C'\.peritncc and 
calculation, and a plant by its ovvn tropism. 
Internal and external forces arc also shaping dead matter that is bcinl.{ 
discarded and replaced, and it is not di01cult to find an analog-y to this p1occss 
in human products. Sec hov; sand will slide down to settle at a c;lopc of 3 1-37 
and try to make a pyramid, which is its natural form at te'>t, its ex­
degrees, 
pression of equilibrium betvveen the conOicting forces of gravitation and friction 
among its component grains. The cone, the pyramid, parallel lines, the plane 
and the globe are all of them 'constants' of Nature's technique and organiza­
tion. Living and dead matter seems to follow a single impulse, displacing .. md 
reorganizing itself~ or grm,·ing, with the o~ject of attaining equilibrium, under 
the direct influence of internal and external forces. ~ature seeks that ideal 
state of equilibrium, or rest, in the balance of these forces, and the moment 
she succeeds in this she ceases to be formless and assumes a characteristic 
shape as in flowers, crystals and other organisms that are the expression of the 
forces that mould them. \ \·e are told that everything on earth is changing and 
so mm·ing, but an equally uni\·ersallaw governs their mm·ement: the seeking 
of a state of rest or harmony, crystallization or maturity. The shape in \\'hich 
matter finds its balance of strength is its perfection: a solution of its own pro­
blem in terms of such consummate economy that there is no superfluity, no­
thing left over. If we add to, or take something from, t.hlat perfection, the shape 
loses its equipoise, its characteristic appearance, and has to start in quest of 
both afresh. 
So, too, human products and structures develop through the will and in-
. tention of man and move towards their intrinsic perfection. T hey seek a final 
form that can only be spoiled deliberately by the emergence of new conditions. 
For instance, the best possible shape of chair can be superseded by a ne\\' form, 
arbitrarily invented for the purpose. But that new and arbitrary shape will 
soon disappear just because it is not the perfect one. Or ifhumanity \\'ere willing 
to start sitting in a ne\v position the perfect shape of chair would haYe to be 
modified accordingly. 
A man who is able to foresee all the various forces which a given b uilding 
will be exposed to should be able to attain perfection because, by the nature of 
things, he is likely to avoid all transient and merely fashionable influences. But 
such an achievement, being a rare exception, belongs to the highest order of 
258 