CHOREOGRAPHY 
revolution becomes more difficult. I n nl\ uc;e of the human bod\, I am not so 
' ' 
limited as the figurative painter and sculptor is becau"c 1 think that there arc 
still a certain number of new movements and an unexplored richness in the 
postures of the human body on the stage. I agree that the human bod)' ic; a 
limitation in art generally. I know from my O\\ n experience that v. e often ha' c 
diOicultics in the choreographic composition due to this fact. I try to avoid thi..; 
evil by projecting the human body further in space than hurnan muscles allo\' 
through the multiplication of the number of dancers and the creation of com­
positions with the chorus. I agree that this is not enough, because this multi­
plication takes place mainly on the horizontal plane and has, to a certain 
extent, ,·ertical limits, but I think that a remedy might be found for this 
limitation. 
I do think about and work on the elaboration of a ne\v elemental and uni­
versal dance language. This work is very important, and the experience of 
others \vho have tried to do it convinces me that such a work must not be done 
hurriedly. 
Certainly I do not see why, in the abstract film, as in a dance movement, 
there should not be some possibilities for kinetic sensations. But to be honest, I 
have not yet seen any completely satisfying abstractly designed film. I do not 
mean that it cannot be done, but it will always be something distinct in itself. 
It will never be able to replace a choreographical creation on the stage, \·vhich 
is and must always be spatial and conserves the immediate contact with the 
audience. A dance, I think, must be warm; I mean that literally. 
Your questions about dramatic and political expression in the dance can 
be covered by a single reply. I am not against expression in the dance. A dance 
may express a certain theme; but this theme must correspond with fundamen­
tal human feelings or with psychological problems which concern everybody 
rather than with political slogans. I think that political tendencies do as much 
harm to politics as to the dance. 
244 