• 
PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
relationships: that forms create relations and that rela tions create forms. In 
this duality of forms and their relations neither takes prececlcnee. 
T he only problem in art is to achieve a balance between the 5ubjccti\ c ~llld 
the objective. But it is of the utmost importance tha t this problem should be 
solved, in the realm of plastic art- technically, as it were and not in the 
realm of thought. The work of art must be 'produced', 'constructed' . One mu -; t 
create as objective as possible a representation of forms and relations. uch 
work can never be empty because the opposition of its constructive clements 
and its execution arouse emotion. 
If some have failed to take into account the inherent character of the form 
and have forgotten that this-untransformed- predominates, others have over­
looked the fact that an individual expression does not become a universal ex­
pression through figurative representation, which is based on our conception 
of feeling, be it classical, romantic, religious, surrealist. Art has shown that 
universal expression can only be created by a real equation of the universal and the 
individual. 
Gradually art is purifying its plastic means and thus bringing out the re­
between them. Thus, in our day two main tendencies appear: the 
lationships 
one maintains the figuration, the other eliminates it. While the former employs 
more or less complicated and particular forms, the latter uses simple and 
neutral forms, or, ultimately, the free line and the pure colour. It is evident 
that the latter (non-figurative art) can more easily and thoroughly free itself 
from the domination of the subjective than can the figurative tendency; par­
ticular forms and colours (figurative art) are more easily exploited than neutral 
form:.;. It is, however, necessary to point out, that the definitions 'figurative' 
and 'non-figurative' are only approximate and relative. For every form, even 
every line, represents a figure, no form is absolutely neutral. Clearly, every­
thing must be relative, but, since we need words to make our concepts under­
standable, we must keep to these terms. 
Among the different forms we may consider those as being neutral which 
have neither the complexity nor the particularities possessed by the natural 
forms or abstract forms in general. We may call those neutral which do not 
evoke individual feelings or ideas. Geometrical forms being so profound an 
abstraction of form may be regarded as neutral; and on account of their ten­
sion and the purity of their outlines they may even be preferred to other neutral 
forms. 
If, as a conception, non-figurative art has been created by the mutual inter-
42 