• 
ART AND THE SCIENTIST 
dcn•Jopnwnts of science, pat ticuJarJy the IH'\\ theories of\ is ion, dclllallclnlrH'\\ 
art togo\\ith them. In the Impressionists, and p.trticul.ul) ~curat, thi ten­
dency was manifest , but the contact there made\\ as not rene'' eel urHil out o\\ 11 
time. and then it "as not '' ith science but "' ith tcclmic.s. l hr oug-h the Con­
slntCti\·ist school and the Functionalist architects, the artist bcg.tn to s<' · new 
and more rigid harmonics" hich the necessities of engineering and economics 
had imposed on the technician. E\'en this contact, hmH'\'Cr, \\a'> casual and im­
perfect. There has been no attempt to think out the full implications ofmoclt·rn 
science for art, and indeed it is doubtful if there is anyone yet capable of doing it. 
\\'hat follows are rather notes and suggestions of the lines along\\ hich such an 
analysis might be made. 
\\'e can consider the different aspects of art for this purpose as the formal 
or modal, the content of art, and its direction or intention. One of the earliest 
and most marked tendencies of the new development in art has been its insis­
tence on its formal character, whether this betrays itself nakedly as a pure!) 
formal or abstract art, or implicitly underlying more elaborate and realistic re­
presentations. \\'hat is so particularly interesting about this development is, 
however, that in many ways it represents a recapitulation of the progress of 
mathematical and physical thought over the period from the Renaissance to 
the present day. Early art was elementary in its geometry though still below 
the intricacies of the hyper-geometries of the modern mathematicians. The 
artist has discovered by intuition and practice many of the stages of this geo­
metrical development. Take for example symmetry. Classical art knew only the 
simplest bilateral symmetry. M odern art, on the other hand, while ostensibly 
rejecting symmetry altogether is effectively reintroducing it in more complex 
forms. These forms have been known, but outside the classical tradition, par­
ticularly in the art of savage races, where the sense of rhythm is far more highly 
developed. The basic concepts of the three-dimensional symmetry are those of 
rotation, such as the symmetry of a flower; of inversion, as in the difference be­
tween the right hand and the left hand; and the combination of these with each 
other and with direct movements in space (see Fig. I). This can be done only 
in a limited number of ways: 230 for three dimensions, 17 for two (see Fig. 2', 
but this is only for regular figures. By altering the scale a far larger number of 
internal harmonies, depending essentially on symmetry, can be introduced. 
Some of the more abstract artists have produced intuitively many of these 
complex rhythms (see Fig. 3). Architecture in particular gives great opportuni­
ties for symmetrical rhythms. 
120 