PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
less transformed manner. This clearly can not lead to an expression of 
their content nor of their true character. One can more or less remove 
the conventional appearance of things (surrealism), but they continue never­
theless to show their particular character and to arouse in us individual emo­
tions. To love things in reality is to love them profoundly; it is to see them as a 
microcosmos in the macrocosmos. Only in this way can one achieve a universal ex­
pression of reality. Precisely on account of its profound love for things, non­
figurative art does not aim at rendering them in their particular appearance. 
Precisely by its existence non-figurative art shows that 'art' continues always 
on its true road. I t shows that 'art' is not the expression of the appearance of reality such 
as we see it, nor of the life which we live, but that it is the expression of true ?'eality and 
true life ... indefinable but realizable in plastics. 
Thus we must carefully distinguish between two kinds of reality; one which 
has an individual and one which has a universal appearance. In art the former 
is the expression of space determined by particular things or forms, the latter 
establishes expansion and limitation-the creative factors of space-through 
neutral forms, free lines and pure colours. While universal reality arises from 
determinate relations, particular reality shows only veiled relations. The latter 
must obviously be confused in just that respect in which universal reality is 
bound to be clear. The one is free, the other is tied to individual life, be it per­
sonal or collective. Subjective reality and relatively objective reality: this is the 
contrast. Pure abstract art aims at creating the latter, figurative art the former. 
I t is astonishing therefore, that one should reproach pure abstract art with 
not being 'real', and that one should envisage it as 'arising from particular ideas'. 
In spite of the existence of non-figurative art, one is talking about art to­
day as if nothing determinate in relation to the new art existed. Many neglect 
the real non-figurative art, and looking only at the fumbling attempts and at 
the empty non-figurative works which today are appearing everywhere, ask 
themselves whether the time has not arrived 'to integrate form and content' or 
'to unify thought and form'. But one should not blame non-figurative art for 
that which is only due to the ignorance of its very content. If the form is with­
out content, without universal thought, it is the fault of the artist. Ignoring that 
fact, one imagines that figuration, subject, particular form, could add to the 
work that which the plastic itself is lacking. As regards the 'content' of the 
work, we must note that our 'attitude with regard to things, our organized 
individuality with its impulses, its actions, its reactions when in contact with 
reality, the lights and shades of our spirit', etc., certainly do modify the non-
53 