• 
CONSTRU CTION AND AESTHETICS 
sphere the artist ''as using symbols that belonged to an earlier phase of intelli­
gence than the forms'' hich mechanical technique ''as ptoducing. l'.tke, for 
instance, the Eiflcl Tower ( 188g). How could he hope to an.d]sc .t structure 
that tells the eye little of its real nature when seen from any one lt'-Cd point in 
perspective, and which can only be gauged by climbing into the cage of inter­
secting lines it patterns against the sky, where top and bottom lose all signifi­
cance as such? \\'hen painting- that is emotional vision had not yet been 
able to get beyond Renaissance perspective, how could painters be expected to 
grasp the emotional quality of buildings that embodied time as a fourth 
dimension? 
It was not till 1910, when the Cubists first succeeded in painting pictures 
which were no longer meant to be viewed from a single angle of vision, that this 
time-lag could be adjusted. 
The advance in terms of time which painting then accomplished made it 
possible for humanity to begin to appreciate the new reality it had itself created 
in terms of emotion. \Vith it art attained a level of resource which science and 
mechanical technique had achieved much earlier on. 
111aillart's Structural Principles. \Vhat, then, is the peculiarity of ~faillart's 
methods ofbuilding? 
In the early days of reinforced concrete this material was applied to the 
same methods of construction as were employed with timber and iron. Being 
the trunk of a tree timber grows lengthways, just as iron becomes when rolled 
into long girders. One dimension always predominates, which is that trans­
mitting the load. As l\tlaillart himself puts it: 'The engineer was so accustomed 
to use these basic materials, which only provide one-dimensional support, that 
they became second nature to him, and restrained him from exploiting other 
possibilities. This was the state of affairs when reinforced concrete was intro­
duced, and at first no change ensued.' 
Maillart was a pupil of Hennebique;* and Hennebique's reinforced-con­
crete structures had beams and columns like timber-framed buildings. Follow­
ing the model of timber construction, his beams spanned from wall to wall 
and column to column, the roof stretching a~ross them being in the form of a 
flat, inert slab. This was the point where Maillart began his life's work. Like all 
great constructors, he has consistently followed a single line of thought, which 
he has progressively developed and expanded in the course of his career. 
*Early in his career Maillart was the engineer in charge of the construction of a concrete 
sanatorium at Daves for which H ennebique was the contractor. 
222 