• 
PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
state depends in great measure on what \Ve cat, on the manner in "hit h our 
food is arranged and on the physical exercise which we take. Tlu ough at t \\C 
are becoming more and more conscious of the fact that the work depends in 
large measure on the constructive elements which we usc and on the construc­
tion which we create. We will gradually realize that we have not hitherto paid 
sufficient attention to constructive physical elements in their relation to the 
human body, nor to the constructive plastic elements in their relation to art. 
That which we eat has deteriorated through a refinement of natural produce. 
To say this, appears to invoke a return to a primitive natural state and to be in 
opposition to the exigencies of pure plastic art, which degenerates precisely 
through figurative trappings. But a return to pure natural nourishment does 
not mean a return to the state of primitive man; it means on the contrary that 
cultured man obeys. the laws of nature discovered and applied by science. 
Similarly in non-figurative art, to recognize and apply naturalla ws is not 
evidence of a retrograde step ; the pure abstract expression of these laws proves 
that the exponent of non-figurative art associates himself with the most ad­
vanced progress and the most cultured minds, that he is an exponent of de­
naturalized nature, of civilization. 
In life, sometimes the spirit has been over-emphasized at the expense of 
the body, sometimes one has been preoccupied with the body and neglected the 
spirit; similarly in art content and form have alternately been over-emphasized 
or neglected because their inseparable unity has not been clearly realized. 
To create this unity in art balance of tlze one and tlze other must be created. 
It is an achievement of our time to have approached towards such balance 
in a field in which disequilibrium still reigns. 
Disequilibrium means conflict, disorder. Conflict is also a part of life and 
of art, but it is not the whole of life or universal beauty. R eal life is the mutual 
• 
interaction of two oppositions of the same value but of a di.fferent aspect and nature. Its 
plastic expression is universal beauty. 
In spite of world disorder, instinct and intuition are carrying humanity to 
a real equilibrium, but how much misery has been and is still being caused by 
primitive animal instinct. How many errors have been and are being com­
mitted through vague and confused intuition? Art certainly shows this clearly. 
But art shows also that in the course of progress, intuition becomes more and 
more conscious and instinct more and more purified. Art and life illuminate 
each other more and more; they reveal more and more their laws according to 
which a real and living balance is created. 
46 