ART AND THE SCIENTIST 
ly unsatisfactory. Problems have to be solved, but the solving of problems is not 
enough. The artist no more than the scientist can occupy himself in permanent 
satisfaction with the contemplative and analytic sides of his work. Socially art 
is not complete unless it passes from the solution of problems to something of 
more immediate social utility. It is true that the artist can as citizen and par­
ticularly among other artists, express and carry out political activities. The 
question, which is one for artists and scientists alike, is: can he do so as artist or 
scientist? Can the discoveries which have been made in the last thirty years in 
the field of much more conscious and less tradition-ridden presentation of form 
be used to produce painting and sculpture which is a powerful part of the social 
movements of the time? Clearly to do so may involve a return to representation, 
but it should be a return on a different level of experience. The artist at the 
moment is in his work necessarily divorced from organic social expression, 
simply because in our civilizatjon there is practically no vehicle for such ex­
pression. Paintings and sculptures are purchasable obj ects, not parts of well­
conceived social construction. As long as this remains so, there can be no satis­
factory solution, but this does not mean that nothing can be done. Even a 
civilization in a state of transition must be able to find expression through its 
arts for the struggles that are going on. The expression need not, in fact should 
not, take the obvious and hackneyed forms of revolutionary art. Nor, on the 
other hand, can it be left to the artists in isolation to discover what form it 
should take. Scientists and artists suffer not only from being cut off from one 
another but being cut off from the most vital part of the life of their times. How 
to end this isolation and at the same time preserve the integrity of their own 
work is the main problem of the artist of today. There are no ready-made solu­
tions, but if the goal can be seen the way to it will be found. 
123 