ART AND THE SCIENTIST 
The question arises as to whether an actual knovvlcdge of what the artist 
is doing ''ould add or detract from his own production or our appreciation of 
it. Only the event can decide, but the analogy of music may here be helpful. 
In music the relations of tone and rhythm are for physiolo~ical and physical 
reasons particularly simple. They were realized in practice long before there 
was any theory, but the advent of theory, far from stifling musical originality, 
gave it an enormous impetus- the rules of harmony and counterpoint worked 
as liberating restrictions, and the same might be true in the visual and construc­
tive arts. A picture of a building might be conceived in a certain symmetry 
combination, much as a musical composition is vvritten in a key. 
Another aspect of modern art which recapitulates mathematical forms is 
the development of line and surface. Here again] classical art was limited to a 
small number of curves and surfaces, circles, wave forms, spheres and cylinders. 
~Iodern art has evolved many more subtle forms, especially sculpture, which 
now depends on far more complex curves and surfaces. Negative curvature 
(saddle or hour-glass shape) is characteristic of much modern work (Fig. 4), as 
are the subtle inflections and the use of nodal points. There is an extraordinary 
intuitive grasp of the unity of a surface even extending to surfaces which 
though separated in space and apparently disconnected yet belong together 
both to the mathematicians and the sculptor (Fig. 5). The stages of this evolu­
tion are interesting. Originally surfaces are chosen as presenting the most easily 
executed representation of a natural surface, the dome of a head, or the curve 
of a torso. In this nature is always pulling back and tends in the end to destroy 
the original simplicity in accurate but insignificant detail. By becoming ab­
stract these restrictions are removed and the study of the forms themselves, 
moved only by subconscious strivings to representation, can be developed. At a 
later stage the two may come together again in a realism informed by the pre­
vious analytic study. 
The Cubist school exemplify another attempt at the solution of the problem 
of surfaces, here resolving them more usually by their principal tangent planes, 
or occasionally, as in the work of Pevsner, by normal planes (Fig. 6), but in 
either case carrying out an algebraic discontinuous decomposition as a prelude 
to a more complex and understanding synthesis. 
To this purely geometric aspect of form has been added in tradition an­
other more mechanical aspect. Every building, and ultimately every picture, is 
anthropomorphized in some inner way so that the effort of lifting and support­
ing its various parts is instinctively felt on seeing it. The conception of balance 
121 