THE FACULTY OF ABSTRACTION 
as abstractions: obviously, as in mathematical reasoning, but no less abstractly 
in dialectical or metaphysical reasoning. To see how extensively and with what 
almost dizzy prestidigitation this can be done one has only to look at the meta­
physical systems of German philosophers like Kant and Hegel- systems which, 
long after they have been discredited as true deductions from experience, will 
be admired as abstract works of art. 
This process of development so briefly and inadequately described must 
now be related to the parallel development·of art. Art begins, so far as we can 
trace its beginnings in the Old Stone Age, with the reproduction of eidetic 
images- that is to say, of images of objects (actually almost invariably animals) 
which for mystical or emotional reasons have been vividly impressed on the 
memory of the artist. Art begins as a purely affective or emotive activity, and 
as such it remains among the most primitive types of mankind still existing (the 
Bushmen of South Africa, for example). It begins to change when, with the 
growth of classification, man requires a symbol to express a particular group of 
phenomena. We have already seen how a word or concept may be chosen to 
express such a group of phenomena. But alternatively a sign or graphic symbol 
may be selected. At first such a sign or symbol will be based on the vividness of 
the eidetic imagery in the mind of the artist, but in time the sign will be repro­
duced with increasing carelessness, with less and less reference to the memory 
of actual phenomena, and eventually will become divorced from reality. In 
this way most alphabets arose and developed, and in some of them we may 
still find traces of their pictorial origins. 
In my recent book, Art and Society, I have argued that such symbolic art, 
gradually divorced from immediate imagery and from the emotional associa­
tions of the object, inevitably loses its vitality and declines. I will not repeat 
the overwhelming evidence which the history of art offers in support of this 
contention. I think it would be well to note here, however, an apparent excep­
tion, best represented in Byzantine art. I should be the last to deny the supreme 
aesthetic appeal of certain symbolic representations of Christ or the Madonna 
which we find in the mosaics and illuminated manuscripts of this period. But 
here I would contend that the artist was in no sense using a symbol as there­
presentative of a generic concept. H e was actually trying to represent, with all 
the emotional awe which such a daring attempt implied, the actual form and 
features of the godhead. Vve have only to observe how the representation of the 
Madonna degenerates at the hands of a more rational or more commercial 
type of artist to have this truth confirmed. 
63 