• 
THE QUARREL WITH REALISM 
ceptional sight, so that its productions arc a revelation to us. r l permits us to 
penetra te the mysteries of the cosmos by means of investigations to which ou1 
human capacities could never aspire. 
then, inundated with images- in the cinema, the ma~azinr, the 
We are, 
daily paper. Is not therefore a great part of the tasks of painting arcomplishrd? 
When a period is almost at an end, when a common incentive no longer ani­
mates it, men indulge in soft intimacy and tenderness. It is natural tha t, at 
such a time, painting should reap a rich harvest, and innumerable painters 
should find employment and good remuneration. But this page has been 
turned- it had to happen one day, and it has happened now- we are entering 
a collective period; painting has lost some of its raison-d'etre, and the painters 
have lost their patrons. That is their tragedy at the present time- the anguish 
of being useless and unemployable. Times have changed; the great army of 
painters, with their public and their patrons, with tasks to accomplish, are now 
without employment. Before considering whether it is possible to save them, 
let us try to decide whether the fate which has overtaken painting is retrograde 
• 
or progressiVe. 
When a period becomes collectivized or acquires undeniable common 
needs, such as those to which the last hundred years have led up, suitable sys­
tems must be established, both social and authoritative- with new ideas and, 
above all, new equipment. 
It is useless to try to imagine what the mechanical revolution of the last 
hundred years really is; it has invaded the whole world; it has upset everything, 
disturbed everything, battered everything, but, at least for those capable of 
reading between the lines, it brings also the certainty of speedy deliverance 
from these misfortunes and crises. 
With the wonderful tool which in future will replace the toil of our hands 
and the sweat of our brow-the machine-we will be able to equip ourselves 
adequately, not only for comfort-a wide and healthy comfort- but also, this 
new epoque of machine-made civilization will give us happiness and a greater 
individual liberty, combined with the most complete greatness and collective 
vitality. 
I refer to impending works-the equipment of the country, of all countries, 
of the world-towns, roads, villages, farms, ports, everything where men live 
or pass through, whether on the earth, or braving the perils of the seas or the 
air. A vast animation has seized on the whole world and has placed us face to 
face with tasks never before contemplated. 
68 