CONSTRUCTION AND A ESTHETICS 
In designing a roof or a bridge, Maillart began by eliminating all that was 
non-functional; thus everything which remained was a n immediate part of its 
structure. H e did this by improving the reinforced-concrete slab until he had 
turned it into a new structural element. \'\'hat l\1aillart has achieved since then 
is based on one idea: that it is possible to reinforce a flat or curved concrete 
slab in such a manner as to dispense with the need for beams in flooring or 
solid arches in bridges. It is very difficult to determine the forces present in 
slabs of this nature by calculation alone. T o obtain p ositive results entailed a 
complicated process which cannot be entered .into here, except to say that it was 
based partly on calculation and partly on experiment. 
Slabs had hitherto played a neutral or passive part in construction. Mail­
lart transformed them into active bearing surfaces capable of assuming all 
forms of stress; and subsequently developed this principle into a comprehen­
sive system of support that is now adopted for types of building in which it had 
previously been considered impossible to use concrete. \Vhether engaged in 
perfecting a new form of flooring or striking ou t new principles in bridge con­
struction, he has always adhered to the same basic method of using reinforced­
concrete slabs as active structural elements. 
Mushroom Flooring.* Maillart's experiments with beamless flooring date 
from rgo8. H e treated a floor as a concrete slab, converting it into an actively 
co-operative structural member by distributing the reinforcement throughout 
its whole area. Since every part of the surface now became self-supporting, 
beams disappeared, their function being resolved into the floor itself. The 
heavier the load this homogeneous typ e of flooring is called upon to bear, the 
greater is the practical inducement to adopt it. Consequently it is usually found 
in warehouses, factories, or other large multi-storeyed buildings. 
The appearance of the branching columns which support this type of floor­
! 
ing somewhat recalls certain traditional styles, resembling the heavy pillars of 
a romanesque crypt in the basements of warehouses and the slender palm-like 
columns of Late Gothic in their upper storeys. In point of fact, however, mush­
room-headed columns have nothing beyond these superficial resemblances in 
*Translator's Note.- Like so many technical terms that have emanated from the United 
States 'mushroom-slab flooring', derived by a process of rather slipshod translation from ' Pilz­
decke', is, figuratively, a rather misleading one; since the head of the edible mushroom (agaricus 
campestris) is quite fiat underneath, while its top is more often convex. The German term 
'Pilzdecke' means literally 'fungus flooring'. Certain kinds of toadstool commonly eaten on the 
Continent (notably agaricus cantharellus) have hoJlow lily-shaped heads which forcibly recall 
the trumpet-mouthed form of the capitals of'mushroorn-headcd columns'. 
223 