ROUTES OF HOUSING ADVANCE 
employed have, particularly in the West of the country, proceeded with housing 
of their own. 
schemes 
ar such action had in America with few exceptions the character of an 
So f
emergency measure. Labour, even qualified labour, trained in field work, can 
be supplied in abundance, but current material prices cannot be paid. The 
consequence is that a precious amount of energy and brainwork is wrought 
into structures, which by the very nature of their material specification are 
doomed to a short life and, what is worse, to a perpetual repaid activity or 
patching campaign. The disproportion oflabour and energy to the value of the 
material worked upon, has- in view of the surrounding technological level­
a demoralizing influence. However, there frequently may appear demonstrated 
the advantage of types oflow-cost habitation deliberately, even enthusiastically, 
approved before production and chosen by the inhabitants often located in 
immediate relation to their place of work. 
As an example might serve housing for farm workers, who are being settled 
by the Federal Emergency Relief Administration on an estate, which was lost 
by the original owner and now is co-operatively run by new settlers. A colony 
which incidentally also represents the tendency of redistribution of population 
by reclamation of unused land. 
However, with the increase of governmental subsidy, like the subsistence 
homesteading- in which the Roosevelt Administration has invested consider­
able effort- the initiative of the settlers as to type of home is considerably re­
duced. It is often minimized, when the pertinent decisions are made by the 
office which handles the financing and supervises the execution of the whole 
development; acceptance of the consumers, who in this case become 'appli­
cants', is expected to follow automatically. 
In the case of an emergency situation of these applicants, acceptance of the 
new habitational type is indeed readily obtained. However, in designing and 
executing such colonies under very similar circumstances for foreign govern­
ments and living in them as an observer, the writer had occasion to find that 
this full acceptance is frequently withdrawn as soon as the grim grip of emer­
gency loosens. The theoretical computations of a governmentally guided archi­
tect as to the habitational needs of, for instance, an industrial population trans­
planted as part-time workers into a semi-rural section, soon have a tendency to 
appear as an octroy of outsiders, as dictated by doctrinaires, whose failures are 
gladly exaggerated by the subsequent users. Racial psychology gives this con­
dition different degrees of acuteness in different countries. 
205 