• 
ROUTES O F HOUS IN G ADVANCE 
type constructions, standardized wood chassis, \'\'eatherproof super-pi}'' ood 
and externally exposed, internally insulated 
shells, light-weight steel skeletons 
hollow-steel wall systems. Aesthetic appearances, finishes, heating and ventilat­
ing installations are of course consequential to the chosen system of fabric::uion 
and erection. 
Example: 
Application of hollow-steel elements for dwelling and school construction. General 
of H. H. Robertson floor units 'Keystone' and of simultaneous structural research 
use 
by Frankland, Lindeberg, V. Palmer. 
The vertical wall elements erected in multiple sections arc based in a typical groo\ ed 
later grouted out with waterproof cement to produce a fixed bearing of 
concrete footing, 
the wall elements which now act like upright cantilevers and individually are designed 
to take lateral stresses of wind attacks or earth shocks. The male and female joint of the 
standard sections tightened with caulking rope and compressed A. C. Horn Vulcatex, a 
of china-wood oil applied with an air gun, permits relati\'e 
rubber-like vulcanization 
elastic movement of the series ofbottom-fixed cantilevers. Lintels are formed of the same 
with holes, are traversed by !-inch round steel 
sheet-steel elements, which, equipped 
take tension stresses at the bottom zone of such girders and combine the top zone 
bars to 
to compressive strength. 
The ground floor is of double-shell construction of twelve inches overall depth. The 
upper slab of integrally coloured and waxed Diatom cement composition is a plenum 
chamber of six inches clear depth which extends under the entire building and into 
which, when desired, hot air is pressed electrically from the furnace. The Diatom cement 
slab forms and acts as a low-temperature radiating panel during the cold season, while a 
retarded convection carries the air volume of the sub-floor void into the vertical follows 
of the cellular steel walls. 
of structural and heating system. On the building fronts which are 
Integration 
to direct sun radiation, small intake openings at the foot of the cellular steel 
exposed 
elements initiate simultaneously with the warming up of the exterior surface an auto­
matic air convection to cool these walls and minimize heat transmission to the interior 
board lining. The sun rays themselves operate this cooling system. 
caloriferic insulation 
The roof construction was for comparative experimentation with building economy 
executed partly in electrically welded steel truss joists and partly in standard R obertson 
both carrying composition roofs on insulating slabs. 
sections, 
Sashes are of polished cadmium steel, horizontally sliding, of novel detail ball-bear­
metal, glass and metal screen doors offull height are horizontally sliding. 
ing. Exterior 
All door bucks steel. Interior partitions largely surfaced with a concealed, locked, nail­
panel board covering according to Muhlbacher. 
less, dense 
210 