CONSTRUCTION AND AESTHETICS 
mushroom-headed columns manifest a certain characteristic heavy-handed­
ness. It can be recognized at the first glance by the presence of an intermediate 
slab introduced between the head of the pillar and the ceiling as in the Doric 
order of co:i.umnation. To the best of my knowledge the Americans have not 
even yet thought of using the slab as a basic element in bridge construction. 
Maillart had embodied this principle in a bridge as early as rgoo; and in 
that over the Tavanasa (I 905) he dared to strip his construction of all disguise. 
The Tavanasa bridge represented a wholly unprecedented form, for in it Mail­
lart discarded massive beams just as he was also shortly to eliminate the beams 
from floors. Instead, he employed a shallow curved reinforced-concrete slab 
for the arch, which with the horizontal slab of the platform, and a series of 
stiffened vertical slabs used as ties to articulate them together, constituted the 
• 
entire structure. 
Thus Maillart resolved bridge-building into a system of flat and curved 
slabs so juxtaposed as to achieve a positively uncanny counterbalance of all 
stresses and strains arising between them. The first realization of a stiffened 
elliptical concrete bridge with an arch of 'egg-shell' thickness (his Valtschiel­
in 1925. 
Briicke) followed 
The elimination of all non-functional members has led Maillart during the 
last few years to dispense with the usual separate decking slab. In these later 
bridges, trains and motor cars run directly upon their naked structural frame­
work: that is to say on the longitudinal slab of the platform itself. 
In Maillart's hands, the slab's rigidity, hitherto an incalculable factor in 
construction, became an active bearing surface, which being under initial ten­
sion opened up possibilities that had remained a closed book for reinforced­
concrete engineering. Thus the torsional strains that would have to be allowed 
for in a concrete bridge built on a curving alignment were previously deemed 
to defy calculation. Nfaillart's Schwandbach-Briicke in the Canton of Berne, 
opened in r 933, was the first example of a road bridge carried out in that 
material with a sickle-shaped platform. 
One ofMaillart's latest designs, a rather larger bridge, carries the recently 
reconstructed main road between Zurich and St. Gall over the River Thur at 
a point where it traverses broken country with a flat-topped hill in the back­
ground. A single arch spans the river-bed, flanked on each side by a short 
approach viaduct supported on remarkably slender columns. 
To appreciate the full plastic beauty of the form of this bridge- the flattened 
curves of the twin hollow ribs, and the manner in which they are yoked to-
225 