• 
SCULPTURE: CARVING AND 
culty. There is no aesthetical prohibition against a sculptor using any kind of 
material for the purpose of his plastic theme depending on ho\' much his "ork 
accords with the properties of the chosen one. The technical treatment of 
materials is a mechanical question and docs not alter the basic attributes of .1 
sculpture. Carved or cast, moulded or constructed, a sculpture docs not cease 
to be a sculpture as long as the aesthetical qualities remain in accord \' ith the 
substantial properties of the material. (So, for instance, it would be a false usc 
of glass if the sculptor neglected the essential property of this material, name!), 
its transparency.) That is the only thing our aesthetical emotions are looking 
for as far as the materials of a sculpture are concerned. The new Absolute or 
Constructive sculpture is intending to enrich its emotional language, and it 
could only be considered as an evidence of spiritual blindness or an act of 
deliberate malice to reproach an artistic discipline for enriching its scale of 
• 
expresswn. 
The character of the new materials which we employ certainly influences 
the sculptural technique, but the new constructive technique which we employ 
in addition to the carving does not determine the emotional content of our 
sculptures. This constructive technique is justified on the one hand by the 
technical development of building in space and on the other hand by the large 
increase in our contemplative knowledge. 
The constructive technique is also justified by another reason which can 
be clarified when we examine the content of the 'space problem in sculpture'. 
At the head of this article there are photographs of two cubes which illustrate 
the main distinction between the two kinds of representation of the same object, 
one corresponding to carving and the other to construction. The main points 
which distinguish them lie in the different methods of execution and in the 
different centres of interest. The first represents a volume of mass; the second 
represents the space in which the mass exists made visible. Volume of mass and 
volume of space are sculpturally not the same thing. Indeed, they are two 
different materials. It must be emphasized that I do not use these two terms 
in their high philosophical sense. I mean two very concrete things with which 
we come in contact every day. Two such obvious things as mass and space, 
both concrete and measurable. 
Up to now, the sculptors have preferred the mass and neglected or paid 
very little attention to such an important component of mass as space. Space 
interested them only in so far as it was a spot in which volumes could be placed 
or projected. It had to surround masses. We consider space from an entirely 
106 