• 
THE QUARREL WITH REALISM 
In order to feed this emotion, \viii we evoke only the Gothic or the: Eg\p­
tians? Should we not rejoice- all who arc present here, that '' Ita\ c been 
able to participate in the terrific expansion of the most liberati ng mo\<'11H'Jit in 
painting which has taken place for a long time a mo\'cmcnl in art '' hich h.ts 
re-united us with the great periods of thought and art across countries and ag-es 
-which brings unequalled possibilities for the future, at the \'eJ )' moment 
when painting and sculpture had lost all style and had sunk into bourgeois stag­
nation- a decadent art, nationalized by Ministries of Fine Arts and I\ cademics. 
I refer here to the cubist movement which, with its droll title, burst on us 
like a liberation. This deliverance was so powerful that I would see in it a great 
and spontaneous explosion taking place somewhere in the world ''hen, all of 
a sudden, by some means and in some place, the safety-valve opens and the 
thing happens. 
This revolutionary event was produced with clarity and with vision. It 
was the artists who started it, like a shell at the end of its trajectory. I do not 
think that, when a discussion has begun so high, we should let it descend to 
mean considerations or money interests or vanity. We must realize what the 
advent of cubism meant, twenty years ago; the result, let it be understood, of the 
labour of our predecessors, perhaps the direct work of a few great seekers of the 
nineteenth century. A great historical event unquestionably. 
It is suggested today that we should repudiate this event, renounce the 
greatness of this conquest! This art which is called abstract through a disquiet­
ing misunderstanding of its meaning (when a name has to be given to anything 
in art, idiotic terms are dug out-it is always enemies who give them), this art 
is concrete and not abstract. In France, this concrete quality could not escape 
the fate of the spirituality of the country, that is to say, a fundamental objec­
tivity. 
At the basis of international production is French art, which, abstract in 
name, is really concrete. It is essentially concrete. I t contains realism. It pro­
ceeds in deep layers towards an organic equilibrium. The origin, the roots, the 
key is to be found in each of its elements. Perhaps the Nordic races- the 
Anglo-Saxons or the Germanic peoples-allowed themselves to indulge in ab­
stractions. It is of little consequence, however; others will decide one day. We 
are now in a position to use this art. In what synthesis will it be possible? H ere 
I will again make a confession. I am an architect, but I am just as much a 
painter-a painter by trade. I have two hearts, as in the song, two home-lands. 
As architect and painter, every day I find myself absorbed in this problem; 
70 