CONSTRUCTION IN SPACE 
human mind desires the sensation of real kinetic rhythms passing in space. 
Theoretically there is nothing to prevent the use of the Time element, that is to 
say, real motions, in painting or sculpture. For painting the film technique 
offers ample opportunity for this whenever a work of art wishes to express this 
kind of emotion. In sculpture there is no such opportunity and the problem is 
more difficult. ~lechanics has not yet reached that stage of absolute perfection 
where it can produce real motion in a sculptural 'vork without killing, through 
the mechanical parts, the pure sculptural content; because the motion is of im­
portance and not the mechanism which produces it. Thus the solution of this 
problem becomes a task for future generations. 
I have tried to demonstrate in the kinetic construction* in space photo­
graphed here the primary elements of a realization of kinetic rhythms in sculp­
ture. But I hold it my artistic duty to repeat in this place what I said in rg2o, 
that these constructions do not accomplish the task; they are to be considered 
as examples of primary kinetic elements for use in a completed kinetic com­
position. The desi~n* is more an explanation of the idea of a kinetic sculpture 
than a kinetic sculpture itself. 
Returning to the definition of sculpture in general, it is always stated as a 
reproach that \'\'e form our materials in abstract shapes. The word 'abstract' 
has no sense, since a materialized form is already concrete, so the reproach of 
abstraction is more a criticism of the whole trend of the constructive idea in art 
than a criticism of sculpture alone. It is time to say that the use of the weapon 
'abstract' against our art is indeed only the shadow of a weapon. It is time for 
the advocates of naturalistic art to realize that any work of art, even those re­
presenting natural forms, is, in itself, an act of abstraction, as no material form 
and no natural event can be re-realized. Any work of art in its real existence, 
being a sensation perceived by any of our five senses, is concrete. I think it will 
be a great help to our common understanding when this unhappy word 'ab­
stract' is cancelled from our theoretic lexicon. 
The shapes we are creating are not abstract, they are absolute. They are 
released from any already existent thing in nature and their content lies in 
themselves. \Ve do not know which Bible imposes on the art of sculpture only 
a certain number of permissible forms. Form is not an edict from heaven, form 
is a product of~Iankind , a means of expression. They choose them deliberately 
and change them deliberately, depending on how far one form or another re-
*See illustrations 2 a11d 3, page 1 12. 
109 