A NOTE ON BIOTECHNICS 
floating languidly on the surface of their hot-house tanks. Fev. who glance at 
these pages realize that those thin leaves can support a large dog or a young 
child as on a raft. But the engineer who examines their under side is astonished 
to find that they might serve as scale models of reinforced-concrete roof-spans. 
For here the monolithic system of columns supporting radiating beams with 
slab decking between them was fully embodied reons before Fran~ois H enne­
bique first worked it out. In the same way the parts of these leaf-beams where 
the tension is most pronounced are reinforced with haunches to increase their 
sheer value. 
Biology is already familiar with a variety of natural organic forms that 
closely resemble forms that have been devised by man. I t was Ozenfant, I be­
lieve, who said that if Nature had had to produce a bottle she would have 
evolved one closely resembling a bottle as we know it. In this connection he 
might have referred to the Samura tree that grO\vs in the desert parts of Argen­
tina. The trunk of this tree looks like a Chianti flask, and it is a real bottle, for 
in it is stored the supply of \Yater needed for the branches and leaves during 
periods of drought. 
Thus there are clearly two branches of technology in constant process of 
evolution, one human and the other phytogenical, which bemg mutually ig­
norant of one another yet attain the same ends. It is therefore rather tempting 
to presume that every problem on which an engineer or architect may be en­
gaged has its solution in natural laws which inexorably inform his invention, 
and even his calculations and drawings. A whole series of phenomena corro­
borates the assumption that the interplay of certain natural forces with various 
kinds of matter fi nds its equipoise in constantly recurring forms. 
A surface subj ect to pressure must be supported in one direction, and 
eventually, if the minimum quantity of matter is to be used, it must be sup-
coveted distinction. Victoria Regia obstinately refused to flower at Kew, but shot out 140 
leaves and I 12 blooms in rapid succession at Chatsworth. This flattering acclimatization of a 
tropical plant, \\hose 5-6 ft. diameter leaves can support a loading strain of 100 lbs. without 
sinking, compelled Paxton to build a new home for it in double-quick lime. The construction 
of its new hot-house, which had a 33-ft. diameter tank and a 61 ft. by 49ft. ridge-and-furrow 
roof, embodied the structural principles of the lily's folia!{e, as did all Paxton's subsequent 
greenhouses. I n explaining his plans for the Great Exhibition Building of 1851 (the Crystal 
Pa lace) to the Fine Arts Society, many years later, Paxton held up a leaf of the Victoria Regia, 
and p ointing to the 2 in. deep ribs radiating from its centre like bottom-flanged cantilevers, 
and the delicate system of cross-bracing fibres that prevenls the webbed membranes between 
Lhem buckling, he modestly remarked: '~ature was the engineer, providing the leaf with 
longitudinal and tranS\'erse girders and supports that I , borro\\ ing from it, have adopted in 
this building.' 
257 