ROUTES OF HOUSING ADVANCE 
ment, of 'self-help' groups and of productive basic building material industry 
have moved into the foreground as possibly active factors. \\'hatever the detail 
arrangements of financing and distributing shelter may be, the characteristics 
of these three factors 'vill pronounce themselves in the planned and executed 
production. 
The slowest motion is that of governmental action, the structural results, 
as mentioned, will be solid rather than very advanced technologically, the 
length of amortization periods will be exaggerated, future elasticity obstructed. 
The scope and volume of course might be truly amazing and greatly surpass 
similar developments abroad, which in the last decade have been so impressive 
to American visitors that some of the here indigenous political aversion against 
a 'government in the building business' has crumbled. The activity of finan­
cially weak 'self-help' groups will-provided certain treasury grants are made 
to them-be speedier, even hasty, but in the majority of cases it may turn out 
technologically reactionary, inferior and even primitive. It will, like the sub­
sistence homestead movement which produces low-grade crops in a largely in­
efficient way, relieve the emergency situation and the social difficulties of the 
moment, but from the point of view of a technologically determined civiliza­
tion it is bound to appear as retrograde. 
The programme of a production industry to introduce advanced technical 
methods into the field of housing might actually be in tune with mass require­
ments or by careful study be brought into tune with it; it might improve eco­
nomic conditions by opening new employment markets, but as a self-styled 
commercial enterprise and dependent on a huge acceptance problem, it is 
obviously packed with too many risks and faces too great a weakness in purchas­
ing power at this time, to get started on its way without priming by some 
external forces. 
Meanwhile shop fabrication of dwellings seemed for years to make clean­
cut sound promises. T echnologically not only promises, but numerous solutions 
are at hand. Full shop-fabrication appears in many ways almost ready to re­
duce the American building-site to a short-term assembling yard. Psychologically 
the matter is not solved sufficiently to secure a serious financial backing for this 
industrially fabricated house, and piecemeal financial underpinning does not 
help much. Possibly it does harm in demonstrating half-raw results and bank­
ruptcies of rushing entrepreneurs. 
Industrial pre-fabrication of habitation is being announced by commercial 
enthusiasts as today's great chance for capi.tal investment and delectable returns 
207 