TH E PRINCIPLE OF ANONYMITY 
revolutionary, adapts itself architecturally by means of the progressive modi­
fication of type forms: a process that is essentially impersonal. 
The vital link that the nineteenth century lost was that between working 
and creating. (William Morris was right even if his remedy was wrong. ) When 
this link is missing, as in the architects' architecture of that period, the import­
ant quality of inevitability disappears: the capacity of thinking architecturally. 
Instead of the application of a universal idiom we find a mere eclectic practice 
of connoisseurship; a capricious variation of style for no other reason than for 
the sake of variation, and-to emphasize my point- for the sake of the ex­
ploitation of personality. We find, as Lethaby phrased it, a battle of the styles 
that indicates that true style is absent. 
I have defined the malady from which the architect-ridden Victorian 
period suffered, as a diffusion of purpose. Periods productive of good architec­
ture, on the other hand-good architecture in the sense of a live universal lan­
guage, not in the sense of isolated good architectural monuments-can be said 
to owe this fortunate condition to a unity of purpose, not .only pervading the 
specialized spheres of architectural and industrial design, but existing in these 
spheres as the echo or reflection of a unity of social and cultural purpose per­
vading the whole oflife. 
Such a unity of purpose allows the establishment of a unity of cultural lan­
guage- the widespread vernacular, in the case of architecture, already referred 
to. The existence of this vernacular might be alternatively described as the 
acceptance of a settled anonymity in architectural design; and it is worth while 
examining the occurrence of an anonymous tradition in the periods of live 
architecture. We may prove to ourselves the necessity of recovering some such 
anonymous tradition (deriving from a greater unity of purpose) in this age, if 
we are to establish an architecture of cultural value. 
The significance of the architectural development in the eighteenth cen­
tury was that that period's social stability, combined with its intellectual capa­
city for the absorption of new ideas and for steady development in a single 
direction, allowed the establishment of an accepted style of building (which, 
because it was accepted universally, was not a style in the Victorian sense) that 
ensured a level of abstract goodness independent of the talent or lack of talent 
possessed by architects as individuals. The architects, in the sense of the de­
signers, (usually simply the builders) were anonymous- that is to say, their 
personalities culturally irrelevant. The mass of small houses, of village cottages 
and of terraces in the market towns in which this universal vernacular mani-
185 