course, the characteristics of the surface depend entirely upon
Of the
characteristics of the materials (canvas and its nature, stucco and
the
treatment, paper, stone, glass, etc.), and the tools associated
manner of its
materials, their use and handling. Texture, which we cannot
with the dis-
length, is—like every other means precise,
cuss here at —a but elastic,
proceeding schematically two
pliable potentiality for in directions:
1. the texture takes a road parallel to that of the elements and thereby
supports them in an external manner primarily, or it is used
2. in accordance with the principle of contrast; that is, it stands in external
opposition to the elements and supports them inwardly.
variation in-between.
The possibilities of lie
from materials and the tools for the producing of a material BP,
Aside the
course, given
the same consideration must, of be the materials and the
tools for the production of the material form of the elements. This belongs
in a detailed study of the theory of composition.
It is important here to point the way to possibilities of this kind, since all
of the suggested modes of creation, with their inner consequences, can
serve not only in the building up of the material plane, but in the optical
destruction of this plane as well.
The elements lying firmly (materially) on a solid, more or less hard and, to
Demateri-
alized
the eye, tangible BP and, in contrast, the elements "floating" without
Plane
material weight in an indefinable (immaterial) space are of fundamentally
different appearance, and stand in antithesis to each other. The general-
materialistic point of view which, naturally, also extended to all expressions
of art, brought about the natural, organic result of exceptional esteem for
material plane, all ramifications. this one-sided-
the together with of its To
indispensable interest handicraft,
ness, art owes its sound, in in technical
knowledge and especially in a thorough consideration of the "material"
itself. It is especially interesting that, as has been said, this detailed knowl-
edge is unquestionably necessary—not only for the purpose of the material
production of the BP, but also for the purpose of its dematerialization in
144