('forms of the simplest geometry as a step towards objectivity'), his 
pupils and the combatants, Malevich, El Lissitzky, Mondrian, Van Does­
burg, all closely connected with the Bauhaus. On the one side the 
'lyrical I' (in Benn 's sense), on the other t he collectivists, 'on e in the 
spirit' with science, social system and architecture, as Moholy formu­
lated it in a Bauhaus lecture in 192 3. 
Th e fronts which emerged in the Bauhaus have persisted: things have 
advanced on parallel lines. Contrasts between phenomena existing 
simultaneousl y are among the stylistic symptoms of the present day. 
Even during the sway of Abstract Expression ism in the 1950's 'Concrete' 
painters headed by Bill, Albers, and Vasa rely (another Hungarian) held 
their own. And although today 'hard edge' Constructivism, Op Art and 
technoid art have won much ground, 'painting', hand-writing and the 
brush-stroke- in short belle peinture and belle matiere going back in an 
almost unbroken tradition to Courbet who, when asked what painting 
was, held up his hand and replied: 'finesse de doigt' - persist too. 
Moholy called belle matiere quite simply 'pigment' and ceased to use it 
more rad ically than Mondrian, w ho stil l put on pigment although not as 
peinture. Moholy rejected (c.1925) al l hand-produced textures, gave 
up painting and called for 'd raw ing w ith light'. 'light in place of pig­
ment'. This beginning led logically to the sequence 'Painting- Photo­
graphy- Film'. 
Moholy was prepared to subordinate the human eye to the 'photo 
eye' (Franz Roh). A remarkable paral lel may be drawn: at the end of 
th e 19th century Konrad Fiedl er wrote of the 'mechanical activity of 
artisti c creation ', of a 'rea lm of t he visible, in which only the formative 
activity of the visible, no longer the eye, can advance'. Yet Fiedler be­
longed to th e other side. He meant the mechanical activity of the hand­
finesse de doigt. The hand takes up the development and continues it 
'at th e very point at wh ich the eye itself has reached the limit of its 
activity' - a philosophical basis for 'action painting'. But Fiedler's 
conclusion is true also of other mechanical activi t ies which create visible 
thi ngs. It is true of photography, in so far as it is handled, as Moholy 
w ished, not traditionally but experimentally. He called for: 'Elimination 
of perspectival representation', 'Cameras with lenses and systems of 
mirrors which can take the object from al l sides at once'. 'Cameras con ­
structed on optical laws different from those of our eyes' He ca lls for 
47 