'scientifically objective optical principles'. the one-ness of art. science. 
technique. the machine. The astonishing extent of his own techni ca l 
and scientific knowledge is revealed in the wealth of technological Uto­
pias buried 1n the footnotes of his Bauh aus book. 'Paintmg. Photo­
graphy. Film' - many of these having meanwhile. as befits true Utopias. 
advanced out of the category of possibility into the category of reality. 
The arti st Moholy's fee ling for the camera was in its time radical enough, 
as Feininger's uneasiness shows. Within photography, however. Moholy 
moved w ith surprising tolerance and universality. very differently from 
our present-day photographers w ho specialise in eith er subjective or 
objective photography, reportage or 'photograph ics'. Moholy admitted 
all this. provided that t he photographic means we re applied in purity 
in the service of a 'new vis ion'. His Bauhaus book exh1bits with equal 
pleasure t he zeppelin and the Parisian grisette. a head-louse and a racing 
cyclist. Pal ucca and a factory ch1mney. the interior of St Pau l's Cathe­
dral in London. seen from above. and a bathing girl in the sa nd (also from 
above). the spiral nebula in the Hounds and an X-rayed frog. the camou­
flage of the zebra in Africa and a pond-fish ing experimental station in 
Bavaria. t he eye of a ma rabou and the 'refined effect of lighting, materials. 
factures. roundnesses and curves' of a Gloria Swanson from Hollywood. 
Ph otographs were taken of the reflections in a convex mirror (the shot 
on page 103 is not by Muche but by Fritz Schleifer. Hamburg. a former 
pupil at the Bauhaus). Trick photography is not forgotten. nor photo­
collage, the favourite of present-day Pop artists - or 'A face emerges 
out of nothing', embracing phases of the portrait extending from Franz 
Lenbach to Francis Bacon . 
One special photographic effect is. however. much emphasised: cam­
era-less photography, the photogram . Christian Schad and Man Ray 
had. indeed. conscripted the photogram into the service of artistic 
experimentation a short time before - but it was Moholy w ho in­
vestigated it not only practically but theoretica lly. eve n philosophically. 
What fascinated him was the mysterious. aperspectiva l picture-space 
w hich could be obtained with the ph otogram. The cry was now no 
longer merely 'light instead of pigment' but 'space through light' and 
'space-time continuum': 'The photogram enab les us to grasp new pos­
sibilities of spatial relationships' M oholy was to w rite later in his book 
'Vision in Motion'- for what appears in the photogram is no more than 
148 