—
1
Germany especially, have played a certain role in
years and which, in
colours, very little has been transferred to our time
the development of
knowledge—which may even have represented highly
of this earlier a
art. It is a strange fact that although the impres-
developed science of
remnants of painting theory in their fight
sionists destroyed the last
immediately—though unconsciously—laid
against "academicism," they
the first foundation stone of a new science of art, despite their contention
2
art.
that nature is the only theory for
which the new of art could
One of the most important tasks science set
Art
History
for itself would be a thorough analysis of the history of art; to determine
the elements, construction and composition in various periods—among
different people on the one hand and, on the other, to ascertain the
growth within the scope of these three questions: the direction, the rate
of speed, and the necessity underlying the enrichment and the apparently
impulsive development—which possibly pursues a definite evolution such
as, perhaps, a wave line. While the first part of this task—the analysis
borders on the problems of the "positive" sciences, the second part—the
nature of the development—touches the problems of philosophy. This
creates a focal point of lawful measure of the human development in
general.
It should be noted in passing
that the revealing of the forgotten knowl- "Dissection"
of earlier can accomplished
edge art epochs be only with great effort, but
this should decisively
eliminate the fear of the "dissection" of art. For, if
"dead" precepts living
lie so deeply buried in works that they only with
great difficulty can be brought to light, then their "injurious" effects are
nothing other than the fear which arises from ignorance.
—
*
See, for example, Entwicklungs-
the valuable work by Ernst Berger "Beitrage lur
geschichte der Maltechnik," parts, Georg D. W. Callwey Verlag, Munich.
5
In the meantime, a voluminous literature dealing with these questions has sprung up.
—
Recently there appeared that extensive work by Dr. Alexander Eibner "Entwicklung
und Werkstoffe der Wandmalerei vom Altertum bis zur Neuzeit," Verlag B. Heller,
Munich.
2
Very soon after this, appeared P. Signac's book: "De Delacroix au Neo-lmpression-
isme" (published in Germany by Axel Juncker, Charlottenburg, I9I0). "|9