and mass belief. With his God-given freedom in the artistic, esthetic
painting
creation of rhythm, he invented the first for painting's sake, and
sake of informative make-believe, been
not for the as had the ideal of
He found that non-objective painting's rhythmic expressing
the past. a life,
creative invention, can be profound if done by visionary master. It can
a
ordering influence
also have a strong on the observer. This, he found, was
painting, through imitative, lifeless
denied to representative its limitation.
denied those schematic, mediocre,
Yet this is equally to condensed pat-
so-called abstract painters, whose decorations
terns by most are as far
being art as organ-grinder from musicianship, or
removed from the is as
the sonata.
the scale is from
rhythmic law of constructive counterpoint, contained creative
The in a
masterpiece, sets into motion life itself, through a rhythm displayed be-
tween harmonies and the contrasts of colour and form, with which
the
order
given space is beautified. In to clarify, for the serious student of
painting, the existing counterpoint in the law of correlation, Kandinsky,
through intense concentration on these esthetic problems, undertook pro-
found studies, outlined by him in his treatises, as well as in his culture
programs. He wrote extensively about the theoretical and technical ele-
ments of this art. These writings offer valuable tools to those who are
endowed and eager to express their creative urge. At the same time, such
knowledge of counterpoint and technical elements is not at all needed by
the layman in order to enjoy this art. Without professional knowledge, all
he is expected to do is either to like or dislike the painting, as he would a
melody or a flower, which, like all other God-given creations, are equally
beyond understanding and which, like art, are simply there to be enjoyed.
Because the non-objective painter reacts intuitively to a superior influence
and realization of the universal law, thus enabling him to give his message,
this sensitive and prophetic artist of our day has refined his senses to
receivership of those invisible, spiritual forces which he intuitively expresses.
He then derives with subtle sensibility his visionary inspiration from the
spiritual domain which indestructible and his very own, in the same
is
in which developed his faculty receive. Thereafter, his
degree he has to
creations develop wealth of variation visions beauty, which,
with a those of
9