At the Only by feeling, are we able to determine when the point is approaching
Boundary
its extreme limit and to evaluate this. This approach to the external
boundary—indeed, the crossing of it somewhat, the attainment
of that
moment when the point, as such, begins
to disappear and the plane in
stead embarks embryonic
its upon its existence—this instant of transition
is a means to the end.
In this case, the end is the veiling of the absolute sound of the form: the
emphasis on its dissolution, the note of imprecision in it, the instability,
the positive movement (or the negative, as the case may be), the flicker-
ing, the tension, the abnormality in the abstraction, the risk inner
of over-
lapping (the inner sounds of point and the plane collide
the with each
other, fuse, and then recoil), a dual note in a single form—that is, the
creation of a double sound by a single form. The multiplicity and com-
plexity in expression of the "smallest" form attained, after all, by slight
changes in its size, serve to the receptive mind as a plausible example of
the power and depth expression abstract forms.
of of Upon further devel-
Abstract
Form
opment of this future,
means of expression in the and further development
of the receptivity of the observer, more precise concepts will be necessary,
and these will surely, in time, be attained through measurement. Expression
in numerical terms will here be indispensible.
There resides in this only one danger: that the numerical expression may
Numerical
Expression
lag behind the sensory perception and that it may, thereby, inhibit it.
and
formula also akin to flypaper to which
A is very much like glue. It is the
Formulae
foolish fall victims. It is like an overstuffed chair which embraces one in
its warm arms. On the other hand, the struggle to free oneself from the
bonds of usage is the necessary preparation for the further spring to new
values and, finally, to new formulae. Even formulae become obsolete, to
be replaced by new-born formulae.
second inevitable fact concerns the outer limit of the point which
The
Form
determines external form.
its
the point is thought of as ideally small,
Abstractly or imaginatively,
30 ideally circle. Nevertheless, just
ideally round. In actuality, it is an small