38 
is taken for the end and that the relationship of many people with the 
work of art is a relationship with the artistic means and not a relationship 
with art in its essence. The artist's ultimate aim, the artistic content, the 
aesthetic compositional accent, is usually entirely overlooked. 
If the relationship with the work of art is a sensorily associative one 
rather than an intellectually associative, an aesthetic one, clearly most 
people's relationship with the new exact formative mode in painting and 
sculpture will not be of the kind essential for any work of art, let alone for 
one in the exact mode. 
If the layman - and by layman I mean in this context anyone who, 
because of bad training, reacts to a work of art in a purely sensorily 
associative manner - who looks at a picture by Nicolas Poussin still adopts 
a sensory attitude (through the persons, figures, trees, houses, landscape, 
etc.), he cannot adopt such an attitude with an exact \;vork of art; unless 
his relationship be only with the means. Thus it may, for example, happen 
that someone looking at an exact work of art feels himself pleasantly moved 
in a sensory way (his taste being involved) by the colour effects. This, of 
course, has nothing to do with an artistic relationship with the work of art . 
XXII. Aesthetic understanding of an exact work of art is possible 
only when the observer has exclusively aesthetic relationships 
with works of art. 
This means: As he looks at the work of art the observer must be able 
to re-create it in his consciousness• ). 
To admire the light in a painting by R embrandt is equivalent to going 
into ecstasies over the velvet and silk in a painting by Cornelis Troost or 
oYer the shine on the dress boots in one by Anton von Werner. 
Were it possible for such an attitude to serve as yardstick for the proper 
e ) Not: reconstruct its subject. l\Iany people naively believe that they have fully understood a modern 
work of art as such once they have managed to recognize the objective t heme which inspired the artist . 