7 
The modern artist uses the phrase 'space formation' in order to enable 
the observer to look at his work. The artist whose occupation consists in 
space formation and is closely involved with it, regards this expression as 
as much a matter of course as does the surgeon the word fracture. The lay­
man, however, has totally different conceptions of space and formation. 
At best he takes 'space' to mean a hollow or a measurable surface. The 
word 'formation' will awaken in the observer an uncertain memory of a 
The combination of the two words (space' and (formation' 
physical shape. 
will therefore convey to him a physical form having spatial depth and 
shown in perspective in the manner of the artists of the past. 
To the modern creative artist space is not a measurable, delimited 
/ surface, but rather the idea of extent which arises from the relationship 
between one means of formation (e.g. line, colour) and another (e.g. the 
picture plane). This idea of extent or space touches the fundamental laws 
of all the visual arts because the artist must understand its principles. 
Furthermore, space means to him a special tension created in the work by 
the tightening of forms, planes or lines. The word formation means to him 
the visible embodiment of the relationship between a form (or colour) 
and space and the other forms or colours. 
As we can see, the two interpretations differ greatly. If, as this suggests, 
there is so great and fundamental a difference between the artist and the 
layman in their understanding of a single phrase, it will be impossible for 
the layman to grasp those numerous concepts which would enable him to 
advance towards an understanding of the work of art itself. 
This, however, applies not only to the layman but also to those con­
cerned in one way or another with the visual arts. 
If confusion of ideas in the terminology of the visual arts were the sole 
cause of lack of understanding and misinterpretation, the remedy would 
be easy; unfortunately, however, there are other difficulties which 
hinder understanding. 