8 
Another cause must be sought in the following fact : since the old ideas of 
the visual arts have become outmoded and are no longer valid, a new 
groundwork of ideas is needed, or, perhaps, a new system of instruction to 
give the layman a new point of view and to clarify his ideas or completely 
reconstitute them. Just as Spanish flies are no longer prescribed in medicine, 
so in painting it has become impossible to cling to a Vitruvian hypothesis. 
Vitruvius says in the Sixth Book of his work on architecture: (A 
painting is the representation of a thing which exists or which can ex­
ist, e.g., a man, a ship or other things for which rigidly outlined 
physical forms have served as models.' 
Experience proves that this idea still persists, both among laymen and 
among many artists too. With so primitive a conception of art many good 
articles and books about the new visual art must inevitably fail to bring 
proper results• ). All these studies (most of them by art-historians) evince 
too personal an interpretation. These writings are the products of a system 
of thought and feeling which has an individualistic bias and as such are 
not suited to elucidat e a creative principle rooted in universality. Personal 
interpretation of the various expressional forms of the new visual art must 
be replaced by a synthesis of its nature, which alone can answer the purpose. 
One of the most significant points of difference between it and earlier 
concepts of art consists in the fact that in the new art the artist's tempera­
ment is no longer so prominent. The new plasticism is the product of a 
universal stylistic intent. 
Daily intercourse with serious modern artists has convinced us that 
they are not concerned to bring their personalities to the fore or to force 
their personal ideas upon any one. Basically, their sole purpose is to 
produce works which shall be as good as possible; and to draw closer to 
the public through their writings so as to promote mutual understanding 
e ) The works which have appeared in Germany, France, Italy and America on the new visual art amount 
to a considerable volume of literature on this question. 