perspectival projection, now influenced his painting once more. Va n Doesburg 's 
Contra Compositions, and a number of paintings for which in a manifesto of 1926 
he fou nd the name Elementarism, date from 1924. The distinguishing feature of these 
paintings is that their linear scaffold ing - consisting of lines intersecting at right 
ang les- is placed diagonally on the picture plane, thereby achieving a more dynamic 
effect. Van Doesburg's Elementarism appeared to Mondrian, his friend and fellow足
worker, to be a deviation from the high and austere principles of De Stijl. Thus Van 
Doesburg's dynamic innovation caused a breach between the two most important 
artistic personalities of the De Stijl movement. 
But it was precisely Van Doesburg's Elementarism - the painting wh ich imbued 
the basic principle of De Stijl with a new dynamic- w hich proved to be a possible 
new point of departure and jumping-off ground for a marriage of painting and 
architecture. In the year 1926 Van Doesburg received a com mission to design the 
interior of the cafe-restaurant 'L'Aubette' in Strasbourg; he carried out the com足
mission in 1927 and published the results in a specia l number of the journal 
De Sttjl in the following year. The interior, which unhappily succumbed during the 
second world war to the crazy ideas of the National Socialists about 'Kunst' and 
'Unkunst'. was an important monument of twentieth-century space formation; 
the way in which colour was used in a manner far transcending its decorative pur足
poses as an additional means of creati ng the spatial structure and of defining the 
space became an example to others. Colour became an indispensable part of the 
plastic space. After he had completed 'L'Aubette' Van Doesburg worked simul 足
taneously at painting and architecture. On the one hand he took his elementary 
painting a stage further and gave it a scientific basis, creating his first 'arithmetical 
compositions' in 1930- and on the other, the spirit of precision wh ich informed 
his painting took shape in the last great product of his architectonic efforts. the 
plans for his own house at Meudon-Val Fleury. The house. designed both as a 
home for himself and as a collective studio for the De Stijl group, was still unfinished 
when Van Doesburg died in Davos on 7 March 1931. He was not yet forty eight. 
Who then was this fascinating, controversial, compelling figure who not only 
created a significant oeuvre of paintings and buildings of his own, but throughout 
the few years granted him for work, always gave in vital ways to others and was the 
centre of an artistic movement? Who was the man who, as animator and spiritual 
father, not only created the De Stij l group but also subscribed to Dadaism and to 
72 