POSTSCRIPT 
H. L. C. JAFFE: 
THEO VAN DOESBURG 
As a creative artist as founder of the De Stijl group, as an intellectually alert per­
sonality, and as a man of practical action Theo van Doesburg has set his stamp 
distinctly upon the twenties of the present century. The fifteen years of his creative 
activity, from 1916 until his early death in 1931, have left their mark upon the 
history of modern art- and that in the most widely separated fields. Versatility, an 
influence exerted in many directions, is highly characteristic of Van Doesburg's 
artistic personality. Were Theo van Doesburg and his achievements to be regarded 
from only one aspect of his artistic talent his image would be distorted and an 
injustice done to modern art. 
Theo van Does burg was born in Utrecht in the year 1883. His original bourgeois 
name was C. E. M. Kupper; but he very early assumed the artist's name, under 
which -far beyond the frontiers of his own country- he was to become at once a 
controversial figure in the field of modern art and a symbol of an unyielding desire 
for renewal. He thus belonged to the generation which produced so many of the 
pioneers of modern art: he was two years younger than Picasso, a year younger 
than Braque and Stravinsky, and the same age as Gropius and Erich Heckel. He was, 
however, a relative latecomer among the champions of modernism in Holland: 
Theo van Doesburg was considerably younger than the poets and men of letters 
who gave a new impetus to Dutch culture in the 1880's and even some of his col­
leagues in 'De Stijl' were a few years older than he. Mondrian was born in 1872, 
Van der Leek in 1876. 
Theo van Doesburg began to study painting when he was sixteen. Response to 
the work of the gifted young artist came early; by 1908, when he was twenty five, 
he was in a position to hold his first exhibition in The Hague. His talent however, 
was not only for painting. Thus he was working- certainly in 191 2- as an art-critic 
for various newspapers and periodicals, in particular for Eenheid, a progressive paper 
which had just been founded. As a critic, Theo van Doesburg gathered information 
about contemporary events in widely differing fields of art. He was one of the few 
connoisseurs in Holland who was familiar with Kandinsky's painting, knew about 
69 
..._ 