25 
Accidental nuances and details are suppressed. Tension arises 1n the 
outlines and clarity in the colours. The relationships of the basic forms 
replace the arbitrary phenomena of the individual natural forms (Fig. 20). 
Materialist art prevailed among the Greeks (Fig. 21). The external forms 
of nature replace the basic cosmic forms. This is due to the fact that the 
vital consciousness of the Greeks was very closely tied to the outward 
forms of nature. They wished to see their gods in bodily form before them, 
to see them, indeed, in highly idealized natural forms; symbolic distortions, 
such as occurred among the Egyptians, hardly exist with them. 
Thus the art of the Greeks will find the approval of any like-minded 
people. The Renaissance and every civilization which is based upon 
physical and material principles demonstrates the truth of this. 
In the Middle Ages, however, a new idea appears. Although it was a 
religious rather than an artistic idea, it still influenced the expressional 
form of art: forms and colours became tauter and deeper, the psychic 
element (because, indeed, the prevailing attitude was religious) is curtailed. 
Contour becomes angular and rigid, colour more definite (Fig. 22). 
The religious principle is in fact another form in which fundamental 
reality is expressed. The duality of this reality is symbolized in the Chris­
tian religion in the antithesis God-Devil (Christ-Judas, position and 
counter-position) . 
Whereas classical art expressed the fundamental essence of existence 
indirectly through religious symbols, later developments in art show that 
its aim is to do so directly•). 
If we assume on historical and genetic principles that the aim of art is 
to give form to the fundamental essence through artistic 
means and nothing else, it follows automatically that we cannot 
regard all ideal works as works of art. 
e ) If art does in fact form unity, harmony, it will embrace all kinds of feeling, including religious and ethical. 