The Architectural Forum devoted generous space to the contest. The over 
2000 entries produced nothing memorable from the architectural standpoint. 
The new architectural idiom as used by the Dutch in their housiRg settlements 
was handled with unfamiliarity. But the competition was otherwise significant: 
here the mechanized kitchen pierces through, with its unified working surfaces, 
cahinets, and appliances. The mechanical installations, such as heating, plumb­
ing, electric lines, were to be shown, and the competitors were free to sketch 
187 
one of the roon1s in a perspective rendcring. Now in 1935, the architects' 
choice fell, with striking unanimity, upon the kitchen. 
After the kitchen-furniture manufacturers (in the 'twenties), the gas (1930) 
and electrical corporations (1935), the third group of industries to enter the 
field were the mass producers of building materials (c. 1940): glass, plastics, and 
188 
plywood. Their development took place during the Second World War. The 
industries that now came to the fore were not tied to the construction of closets, 
ranges or refrigerators. They were in a position to offer the public new and 
exciting things, and sought to incorporate their materials on every possible 
occasiOn. 
Now, over two decades after its uphill struggle on the Continent, architecture 
found belated allies in support of its preference for light materials and for the 
wide window space. 
Typir,al of what the housewife wanted in the 1940's was her demand for 
a large 'picture window' above the kitchen sink. According to statistics these 
18
windows called forth more enthusiasm than any other suggested change. ' 
Second in order of preference was the idea of placing a mirror in the kitchen.'" 
Outward-opening cabinet doors, which through some tyranny of standardiza­
tion had persisted in the 'streamline kitchen,' disappear. The closet between the 
kitchen and the dining room becomes transparent. The connection of kitchen 
and dining room is stressed. The refrigerator will have glass walls (fig. 351). 
The housewives expressed satisfaction at the idea of watching the roast through 
the oven's tunnel-shaped glass eover, while others feared that the material 
might become discolored. We are referring here to the Libbey-Owens-Ford 
Company's 'Day after Tomorrow's Kitchen' which was exhibited for fifteen 
7 
18 Ibid. p.276, Basement Playroom, Kitchen, or Laundry. 
188 
A group of 23 manufacturers of building materials sponsored the 'Design for Post War Living' 
competition published in California Arts and Architecture, Los Angeles, Sept. 19!1-3. 
1ss Mary Davis Gillies, 'What Women Want in Their Kitchens of Tomorrow,' A Report of the 'Kitchen 
of Tomorrow• Contest Conducted by McCall's .1\Iagazine, New York, 19,!4-. 
00 
1 The 'Composite Tabulation of 19-H Consumer Ballots resulting from Exhibition of the Libbey~ 
Owens-Ford Kitchen of Tomorrow' gave the following percentages. For the large picture window, yes: 
96.6%. For a mirror in the kitchen, yes: 95.1% (1944). 
617 