in Egypt -it would seem that the medieval tumhler lock, with its tumhlers 
lined up one behind another and with its flat notched key, originated outside 
Egypt. Archaeologists even doubt whether any tumhler lock originated in that 
land at all. Locks huilt on the tumbler principle (the Laconian lock) seem to 
have been used in Greece from the sixth century B.C. onward and to have been 
32 
carried to Egypt in Greek or Roman times. 
Evidence in regard to where this 'Egyptian' lock originated- in Babylonia, 
in Egypt, or in Greece of the fifth century B.c. -yields only ambiguous 
interpretation. 
On Babylonian cylinder seals dating as far hack as the third millennium B.c., 
it has heen noted, the Sun-God carries a jagged symhol." Some archaeologists 
have ioterpreted this symholic instrument as a saw, others as a key. It is not 
for laymen in the field to hazard an opinion; we shall merely point to the various 
interpretations and to the uncertainty of its past. 
As we have seen, it cannot he traced with certainty even to Egypt. Tangible 
evidence hegins only with the Hellenistic period, hut suppositions regarding 
its time of origin vary within the range of a millennium. 
Concerning the Greek lock of Homeric and post-Homeric periods, carefully 
gathered information is available." Vase paintings and Attic tomh reliefs 
confirm the accuracy of Homer's description when Penelope unlocks the door 
of the chamber in which Odysseus' how is stored, 'and took the well-hent key 
in her strong hand, a goodly key of bronze, whereon was a handle of ivory ... 
anon she quickly loosed the strap from the handle of the door, and thrust in 
35 
the key, and with a straight aim shot hack the bolts.' 
This early Greek key was no more than a sort of holt-rammer. The priestesses 
carried such a long heavy key of bronze over their shoulders. Its two L bends 
and long-shafted crank somewhat recall the handle of an automobile jack. 
Just as the cranked shaft must search under the car to find the jack, so the 
Homeric key had to pass through a hole high up in the door in order to find the 
bolt on the inside and ram it. Later, its sharp angles were softened into an 
easy S curve, resemhling the human collar-hone, which thus gained its name of 
key-bone or clavicle." 
32 
Compare Daremherg and Saglio, Diclionnaire des Anliquith grecques el romaines, article 'Sera.' 
83 
Felix von Luschan, 'Ueber Schloesser mit Fallriegel,' Zeilschrifl fuer Elhnologie, Berlin, 1916, 
48 Jahrgang, p.423. 
u Hennann Diehls, An.like Technik, Berlin, 1914; cf. chapt-er on 'Ancient Doors and Locks,' pp.34ff., 
illustrated with reproduction of vase paintings and reliefs; contains a convincing reconstruction of the 
Homeric lock, or, as we here term it, 'bolt-rammer.' 
lJi Odyssey, XXI, Butcher and Lang transl. 
36 
Diebls, op.cit. p.40, depirts side by side key-bone and temple key. One such key of a celebrated 
sanctuary of Artemis of the fifth century B.c. bas been retrieved. 
72 