the stringent of mechanical science to the material world can supply ... lhere 
is developed a style of art, at once national and grand.' " 
PURISM AND STANDARD OBJECTS AS SYM.BOLS 
All nlltlotieed, the articles of everyday nse act upon man. How they hecome 
part and parcel of his life, the Cubist painters revealed around 1910. The simple 
ohjects recommended to train the eye of the child in 1849 are now a starting 
point for artistic expression. And the quiet outlines of jugs, hottles, glasses 
flow through the paintings of the Purists of the 1920's, Ozenfant and Jeanneret 
(LeCorhusier) (fig. 204). 
To render the livingness of their fonns, the contours are made to flow, are set 
in motion, interruptL'<i, rent asunder, repeated, or conjoined. Their shape fade.' 
away and reappears. They are concrete and intangihle, transparent and opaque, 
hovering and at rest, thin as air and massive in turn. In the early still lives of 
Juan Gris, the wooden structure of a wall or of a violin infuses an area, asserting 
itself as insistently as a tree picked out by a projector against the night. 
The same is done with the color: brown, hlack, blue, neutral'shades, or green. 
They, too, shed their descriptive function, meeting in planes or penetrating one 
another in ohedienee to their own laws: a development .that the following 
decades constantly earry further. 
All this is made possih\e only by a spatial vision that has hroken with copying 
and with perspective; an approach that allows structure, color, and form to be 
gathered into planetary systems; that changes hottles, glasses, plates, pipes, 
tahles, musical instruments, into objects that lay hare the very essence of their 
. 
meamng. 
SURREALISM AND MECHANIZED ADORNMENT 
It is otherwise with the products of mechanized adornment. The seething 
surfaces and tormented lines cam10t join in unifying curve.,, in mariage de con­
tours; no transparency or structural statement lays bare their meaning. Taken 
one by one, the statues, pictures, vases, carpets, are harmless and insignificant. 
Among them one may even find delightful pieces (fig. 206) whose raw-honed 
naturalism recalls the woodcuts of a Granville (1803-47). But viewed in their 
totality, accumulated museum-fashion, as the custom was, their bastardized 
forms and materials react upon the spectator and corrode his emotional life. 
n Quoted in Journal of Design (1851), vol. v, p.l58. 
360 