MEDIEVAL COMFORT 
The Middle Ages and Mechanization 
WnY, one may ask, do we begin with the medieval period? We are to study the 
growth of mechanization. Why not start rather with the Henaissance, whose 
rationalistic approach lies so much closer to the spirit of mechanization? There 
are many reasons. 
We want to gaia some understanding of the beginnings from which Western 
life has continuously developed. Beginnings offer the surest footholds. Lookiag 
at them, we see as in a mirror. What features have changed? Which are pre足
served? Which are lost? What are the new impulses? 
The beginnings of this unbroken development were affirmed when, for the 
first time since Home's collapse, living standards rose to a point makiag burgher 
life possible. For the first time since Home, culture spread roots and prospered 
in urban society. The old European cities began to revive from the eleventh 
century on, and the thirteenth saw more towns founded than any later century. 
The Henaissance, leaning on the Ancients, b-roadened our horizons. The 
Middle Ages emhrace the roots of our very existence. 
Not only do Gothic church spires dominate the town, hut Gothic ways of 
life still survive, often beneath our consciousness. These modes of living have 
often retreated to the mountains or to other places inclined to steadfastness and 
tied to medieval methods of production. The tractor has no grip on steep 
mountain slopes. Peasant life, tenacious in its hahits, in its houses, in its furni足
ture, and even yet in its dress, lingers in the late Gothic. The peasant of central 
Switzerland or Appenzell draws the same 'shepherd's smock' over his head as 
the Amish and the Mennonites in Pennsylvania. Both garments have the same 
origin; they differ only in material; 1inen in Switzer1and, corduroy in America. 
More significant, hut often less recognizable, are vestiges of the medieval 
altitude toward production. Guild ethics centered around one fundamental: 
maintenance of quality. The European countries whose sense of quality has re足
maiaed vigorous alongside of mechanical production are those where Gothic 
modes of living have survived. 
The survival of the baker, the hutcher, the innkeeper, and many other crafts足
men deeply influences the whole temper of life. If the complicated craft did 
258 