The Nomadic Jcurniture of the Nineteenth Century 
Light Camp Furniture 
Collapsible, transportable camp furniture opens a wonderfnl pla~gronnd to 
fantasy. All must be encompassed within slight bulk and any combination of 
different utensils mnst be packed into the smallest space with the barest reliance 
on mechanical impedimenta. Everything must he simple. Every idea must 
find its most direct expression. 
The germ of collapsible furniture is the x-chair, whether folding or, as some足
times in Antiquity, fixed. What had been a household piece in the classical 
world became, we rec11ll, a king!~ throne in the early Middle Ages (King Dago足
bert's seat from the Merovingian treasure). In Gothic times we found an abbess's 
chair of this shape. The Itenaissance elaborated the pattern as a series of ribs, 
x-shaped or hip-jointed (fig. 143). In the nineteenth century the folding camp 
stool becomes one of the common articles of the mass market. 
This collapsible camp stool is not left unaltered. Problems arise: How can 
it be made more comfortable to sit on? How can it be equipped with a back rest 
and still fold compactly? 
Manifold ideas come to light. One of them consists in movably binding the 
legs at mid-point (hy means of a met11l ring, for instance). When collapsed, 
the chair fornts a bundle of four struts. One motion will open them like an 
umbrella, so that their four ends extend a taut fabric. This action simultane足
87 
ously raises a pair of arms linked by a strip of canvas forming the back rest.
To compress a bed into narrow compass is somewhat harder. In Gothic 
times, trussing beds appear, often carried in the field. Charles the Bold of 
88 
Burgundy seems to have heen first to use a camp bed (1472). In the field 
everyone apparently slept on the ground; Burgund")' was then the most refined 
court of Europe. The seventeenth century carried the appointment of these beAls 
beyond the threshold of luxury. Scbiibler's collapsible bed of about 1730, 
already mentioned (fig. 300), likewise falls into the category of demountable 
camp furniture. 
In mid-eighteenth-century France (1756), we bear of 'carpenter-mechanics' 
(menuisier-machinisle)- c,ombinations comprising 'bed, canopy, cover, stool, 
sr U.S. Patent 40,208,6 Oct. 1363. Portable stooL The Museum of Modern Art, New York, saved 
the original model from the Patent auction of May 1943. The Museum also owns the model of a 'Pocket足
Chair' (U.S. Patent 163,623, 25 May 1375), whose case serves as a seating surface, and which is constructed 
on a similar but less ingenious principle. 
ss Havard, op.cit. vol. m, col. 464. 
469 