low stool in a similar posture (ng. 138). With bowed back, he holds the narrow 
writing desk on his lap. In the fifteenth century, the desks of monastic painters 
or of secular scholars were carefully fashioned for convenience and adaptability 
(figs. 151, 152, 154). 
In Holbein's schoolroom of 1516, with its stools and benches of varying heights, 
a woman, seated at a sloping lectern, is teaching a child. She now occupies a 
folding chair (Dante chair) as favored hy the rising Renaissance. 
A King's Board: Salome Dancing before Hm·od. Catalan School, c.I460 
In what posture did medieval people take their meals? The company is seat€<! 
on benches with their hacks to the wall (fig. 144). Here, as in the Lit de Justice 
of the French court, finely worked hrocades and costly apparel set the tone. 
Here again we fmd not the slightest sign of refinement in furniture. The table 
ctmsists of loose hoards, which at mealtime arc laid across roughly hewn trestles. 
As we shall see, the austerity of this furniture -which to later times would 
seem improvised- is not due to a technical inability to achieve comfort. 
The Chair Makes Its Appearance, c.l490 
We are nearing the time when the chair will he regarded as a standard article. 
A few forerunners (c.l490) ' of present-day comfort have been preserved from 
the Palazzo Strozzi, Florence (fig. 145). In this chair the eye immediately recog­
nizes traits of the earlier types, whose stamp it still bears: the three-legged stool, 
with roughly hewn peg-legs set directly into the slab, as in the stools of the Dutch 
kitchen or Holbein's schoolroom. 
Then refinements set in. The seat becomes smooth, and a profiled molding 
conceals where the legs enter. The octagonal shape invites one to sit not only 
frontally, but diagonally, or at an angle, informally, like the people in the Dutch 
'Carnival Scene.' The new style focuses in the narrow, stele-like back, topped 
hy the carved arms of the Strozzi, in a tondo (circle). 
It is hard to say whether this stiff, narrow board is meant as a back rest or 
whether it is a vestige of the Gothic hacking intended as a symbol of rank. The 
chair's proportions reflect its lineage; the low and heavy understructure con­
tradicts the finely elongated back shaped with early Renaissance delicacy. It 
is a beginning full of contraclictions. 
Most important of all is the fact that several uniform chairs have been pre­
served from the Strozzi Palace. This too suggests that around 1490 -in the 
2 
Wilhelm Bode set.<; at c, 1490 the date of the chair in the Figdor Collection. Cf. Wilhelni :Bode, Das 
Hausmoebel der Renaissance, Berlin, 1921, p.21. 
263 