insight and freedom of their declared principles proved better guides than their 
executed work. 
Although this may not strike one at first sight, they sought to establish basic 
40 
and elemental principles. Owen Jones' Grammar of Ornament (1856) clearly 
states this aim. It carefully assemhled ornament of widely separated peoples 
and periods, from China and the Near East to Celtic enlacement and the Baroque. 
Jones lifts the ornament from its material- silk, linen, wood, stone, or pottery 
- and flattens it out in color upon the plane surface. His aim was the reverse 
of what it might seem. 
'I have ventured to hope that in thus bringing into immediate juxtaposition 
the many forms of beauty . . . I might aid in arresting that unfortunate tend­
ency of our time to he content with copying, whilst the fashion lasts, the fornm 
41 
peculiar to any bygone age.' '.These pattern pictures should directly stimulate 
perception, just as do the DUrer woodcuts in Cole's hooks for the young. Owen 
Jones makes this clear in the last chapter, where he offers examples of his own. 
Here he does not succumb to the 'fatal facility of manufacturing ornaments.' 
He does not try to invent new ones. He does not go to nature for a photographic 
or plastic copy, or choose to follow his own advice of' engrafting on the experience 
of the past the knowledge we may obtain by a return to nature for fresh inspira­
tion.' He wishes only to 'detect the laws which are to he found in nature ... 
we may gather this from a single leaf.' " Across the whole page, without light 
or shadow, he draws the large and small leaves of the horse chestnut, pressed 
onto a flat surface, like a Chinese print (fig. 203). As in a herbarium, he gathers 
the scarlet oak, the passion flower, the onion, the daffodil, the dogrose, or the 
iris. He confines himself to a few elements; hut when one observes how the 
chestnut leaves are organized within the white page, and how the iris is simpli­
fied in form and color and its flowers represented in plan and elevation, 'from 
which it will he seen that the basis of all form is geometry,' one realizes that 
guiding principles of Art nouveau at the turn of the century will he closer to his 
outlook than the sumptuously flowered carpets of his own time. 
His attitude to color is also wholly unimpressionistic. He visualizes color as 
components of planes, not as coloring for illusionistic purposes. He s•eks a 
return to elementary colors: 'Usc primary colors'- pure blue, red, yellow, 
and use them in architecture for inherent spatial interaction; forms and planes 
for their advancing or receding value. It is much as if LeCorhusier were taking 
one through a building to make clear the function of color. Against strong 
opposition, Owen Jones painted color into the skeleton of the Crystal Palace 
'o Reprinted, London, 1910. 
4 4
2 Ibid. p.l57. 
1 Jones, Grammar of Ornament, Preface. 
354 