Johann Georg Bodmer was a restless inventor of a type often found in his 
day. He was spurred from country to country, from invention to invention, 
as if he might thus bring the times to ripen with the pace of his ideas. He seems 
to have heen sought out for advice,'" hut flourishing success he did not know. 
He finally died at the place whence he had set out, Zurich. The problem Bodmer 
attacked time and again, conveyance within production, yielded him true ad­
vances as early as 1830, toward the integrated management that was later to 
find its elaboration in the assembly line. 
The 'Sixties 
The division of labor, which Adam Smith regarded as the pivotal point of 
industrialization after mid-eighteenth century; Oliver Evans' sudden achieve­
ment of the continuous production line, 1783; the manufacture of ships' biscuits 
as organized in the Victualling Offices, 1804 and 1833; J. G. Bodmer's layout 
of a Manchester machine-tool factory, with traveling cranes and rails to convey 
the material to the convenient spot, 1839 - all 1l1ese were steps toward the 
assembly line. 
Despite scant knowledge of nineteenth-century anonymous history, we can, 
passing over many facts, tell when, why, and how the specific form of the pres­
ent-day assembly line first appeared. This is no mere date. It marks the put­
ting into practice of the dominant principle of the twentieth century: industrial 
production based on efficienc). 
The present-day assembly line had its origins in the packing industry. It 
originated there because many of its devices were invented in the late 'sixties 
and 'seventies, when slaughtering and its manifold operations had to he 
mechanized. 
These inventions- kept in the Patent Office at Washington, and some of 
which we have chosen to illustrate the industrialization of slaughtering -
proved, with few exceptions, unfit for practical use. They did not work; in 
the slaughtering process the material to be handled is a complex, irregularly 
shaped object: the hog. Even when dead, the hog largely refuses to submit to 
the machine. Machine tools for planing iron, undeviating to the millionth of 
an inch, could be constructed around 1850. Down to the present day, no one 
has succeeded in inventing a mechanism capable of severing the ham from the 
33 'It was about this time [1834] that, the formation of a railway between London and Birmingham was 
contemplated. One of the directors invited Mr. Bodmer to give his views as to the be.••t system of car­
riages. 0n this occasion Mr. Bodmer proposed the construction of carriages since adopted in the U.S.A., 
in parts of Germany, in Switzerland, and the distinctive feature there is a longitudinal passage through 
the middle of each carriage, so that the guard can pass from one end of the train to the other with greatest 
ease and security.' Minutes of the Institution of Civil Engineers, op.cit. p.585, 
93 