the hack and arm rests." Unlike the American patent furniture with its mechan­
ical mobility, this type uses the resilience, the springiness, of materials to pro­
vide a modicum of elasticity. Soon the tubular chair loses all resemblance to 
the earlier wooden chair: part merges into part, flowing in an endless circuit. 
Diverse but familiar elements pass into the inventor's mind, and are fused 
into a new whole, It was not ouly tne bicycle handle bars or the steamed-wood 
chair that entered into the new type, hut a new optical vision. Tbe emphasis 
on structure and the desire for transparency are signs first discerned in painting. 
The Russian painters and sculptors around 1920, Snprematists and Construc­
tivists, may have furnished certain esthetic impulses. Constructivist wire 
sculpture, with its aerial lightness and transparency, truly fit Marcel Brener's de­
18 
scription of his tubular chairs, 'They do not encnmber space with their mass.' 
The Cantilever Tubular Chair 
The development of the tubular chair was completed in the space of a few 
years, from 1925 to 1929. In 1927, under the leadership of Mies van der Robe, 
the German W erkbnnd built a settlement near Stuttgart, an undertaking as 
bold as it was unique. Architects of the various European countries in which 
the new movement stirred were invited to build houses where they might trans­
late their ideas into reality without censorship of any kind. Besides LeCorbusier, 
Walter Gropius, J, J, P, Oud, Peter Behrens, and others, the younger growth 
was also given its opportunity. For many of these younger men, this was their 
first chance to see their plans put into practice. Among them was the Dutch­
man, Mart Stam; in one of his houses tubular steel chairs were seen, having not 
four legs but two. The front legs ended in 'runners,' which gave the seat a 
hovering aspect. These were the first cantilever chairs!' Mart Stam's black­
painted chairs were neither elegant nor resilient. The tubes were connected 
hy woven canvas strips (fig. 329), and only in the seat and back rest of his 
armchair did be aim at elasticity, by stretching broad rubber strips, Neverthe­
less these chairs, with their compact rectangular outline, announced the form 
that was to become standard, 
20 
A few weeks later, Mies van der Robe exhibited cantilever tubular chairs 
in his own flat at the Weissenhof settlement at Stuttgart. These chairs were 
n Canvas stretched by the sitter's weight was familiar in eamp and deck-chairs. Now the elasticity 
of the steel tubing is brought into play to keep the material permanently taut. 'The taut cloth forming 
the hack rests and seats are of a material so far used for tropical belts and boot-laces . . . The traditional 
materials thus take on a new meaning, with unknown and so far overlooked potentialities ... .' Marcel 
Breuer, Berliner Tageblatl, 19 Oct. 1929. 
18 
Ibid. 
19 
Illustrations of Starn's interiors in the Werkhund settlement at Stuttgart. will he found in lnnen­
raemne hy Werner Graff for the German Werkbund, Stuttgart, 1928, Ahb.98; chairs: Ahb.51-2. 
20 
lhid. Mies van der Robe's Interiors; chairs: Ahb.53. 
493 