The seventeenth century has also left us descriptions of the llussian bath." 
More fortnnate than the French Abbe was the Earl of Carlisle, ambassador of 
the crown to the court of the 'Great Duke of Muscovie,' who found the Russian 
haths a source of refreshment and delight. His account contains little that is 
new. He notes that 'their Bodies he well washed with Warm water, or some 
other liquor, and ruhhed all over with hand-fuls of Hearhs ... they commonly 
take a Dram of the bottle to re-inforce their Spirits.' " The hath, it is always 
stressed, is regarded as a means of regeneration for the masses, no less to main­
tain bodily sweetness than for the guarding of health. 
Most interesti~g, perhaps, is the Earl of Carlisle's observation that the 
baths were believed 'very necessary for new married people ... especially after 
30
their first congress, they always make use of this kind of purification' - a 
custom of great tenacity, which, like the cult of spirits, points to a ritual signili­
cance. Carlisle's observation to the effect that the baths were more numerous 
31 
in the countrysides than in the cities- 'they were as rare at Mosco as hunting' 
--agrees with what the Great Soviet Encyclopedia has to say on the matter: 
the govermnent of seventeenth-century Russia set up baths in the cities, and 
encouraged their operators hy granting them freedom from taxes. 
The fact that Russia was not permeated hy mechanization in the nineteenth 
century may partly explain why the bath was able to maintain itself to the 
present day. After the Revolution of October 1917, this popular institution 
was promoted as an important instrument of national hygiene, and detailed 
specifications were promulgated. 
When the first quarter of the nineteenth century sought to bring hack vapor 
bathing, it transformed this social institution into a private steam cubicle or 
vapor-bed bath. 
2
s Augustin, Baron de Mayerberg, Relation d'un Voyage en Afosconie, Paris, 1853 (a translation of his 
Iter in Moscoviam, 1661-2. 
29 
A Relation of Three l?mbasRies from llis Sacred Majesty, Charles II lo the Creal Duke o.f Muscovie, the 
King of Sweden and the K in.g of Denmark, performed by the Rl. lion. the E'arl of Carlisle in the Years 1663 
and 16611, London 1669, p.53. 
30 
Ibid. 
a1 Ibid. p.l42. 
650 