surprising speed. Around 1900 the triumph of the present-day hathroom hecame 
clear. Arouud 1920 it estahlished itself as an appendage to the hedroom in the 
private house. 
It may he said without exaggeration that this standard, the douhle-shell 
enameled tuh attains a degree of comfort that had heen pursued for thousands 
of years. By long technical training our age acquired the facility to solve ahuost 
any prohlem it cared to tackle. When the present-day standard type was called 
for, it too sprang into heing. 
The Bathroom and the Mechanical Core 
What might he done to reduce that ever-growing part of the hnilding outlay, 
the cost of mechanical utilities? The hathroom had at last acquired a standard足
ized layout. Was it not time for mass production to step in? Could not the 
lahorious mode of installation he simplified? 
By 1945 the leading fixture companies were at work on assemhled plumbing 
units that should satisfy a variety of requirements. Systematization should help 
ahhreviate the lahor of huilding, without curtailing the freedom of the architect. 
Prior to this, in the e11rly 'thirties, a movement to cut down sharply the cost 
of plumbing, still fitted lahoriously hy hand methods, had got uuder way among 
the engineers. Yet in 1945, satisfactory solutions were not at hand. The reason 
lay in the complexity of the task, for the hathroom, it soon heeame clear, is 
hut part of a larger entity, the mechanical core. Kitchen, laundry, heating, 
atmospheric regulation, were claiming more and more space. In the hasement 
of a luxurious American honse having all the technical aids to comfort on the 
modern market, there was plant enough to run a small factory. To scale this 
down to the size of the normal household was no simple task. Another reason 
why the bath unit progressed so little toward a true solution lay in the isolated 
way technicians envisioned and handled the prohlem. For it could only he 
solved hy suhmitting all parts of the house to thoroughgoing reconstruction. 
The course chosen hy the engineers- - for it was they, and not the fixture 
manufacturers who made the first move -may he indicated hy a few pro足
posals which reached heyond the experimental stage. The aim is to mass足
produce the entire hath unit-floor, ceiling, walls, from the plumbing down 
to the huilt-in soap holder, for shipment direct from the factory to the huild足
ing site. 
It is to he transported either as a structural unit or in a numher of sections. 
If sectioned, the choice lies hetween horizontal slices or vertical ones. An early 
706 