bestrewn with figures, landscapes, and giant flowers. The invention of the self­
actor had brought textile machinery to a peak. An English patent is announced 
14 
in 1827: 'an improvement in the manufacture of Venetian carpet.' The 
flowers are made much wider and longer and may extend quite across a four­
." 
quarter carpet or a still wider carpet if necessary. . . 
'The Royal Damask Carpet,' the inventor proudly named his multicolored 
textile, whose expanse and breadth of pattern had never before been achieved. 
The Jacquard loom, hy increasing the number of cards and needles, freed the 
designer from the limitations of handicraft and enabled him to realize his every 
caprice, reasonable or ahsurd. 
But when did mechanization of adormnent take full effect? When did mass 
production begin to proliferate statuettes, vases, vessels, and tableware? 
It was assumed from the start that these objects should appear to have been 
made hy hand. To simulate this, machines and devices had to he invented for 
ornamenting, embossing, counter-sinking, or raising surfaces. 
Indeed the British patents of 1830 and 1850 show that industry never tired 
of inventing new means to simulate handicraft with imitation materials and 
imitation forms. In less than ten years, from 1837 to 1846, the Office granted 
thirty-five patents for 'the coating and covering of non-metallic bodies,' 'coat­
ing surfaces of articles made of wrought iron which may he nsed in substitution 
of japanning and other modes now [1843] in use,' and 'mastic or cement which 
16 
an artificial stone and for covering metals.' 
may be also applied as 
Then galvanizing began to thrive- the 'dipping process' whereby castings 
or sheet-metal objects were dropped into molten zinc. The dull edges and loss 
of definition did not affect their popularity. 
As the century advanced, reproduction hy electroplating (invented hy the 
Russian Professor Jacobi, of Dorpat, 1837) grew on a large scale. This made it 
possihle to cover plaster with a hair-thin layer of metal so as to give the appear­
aoce of bronze. 
The abuse of mechaoization led, by around 1840, to a decay or at least a 
weakening of the sense for materials. 
It went beyond the biding of inferior materials in more valuable coatings. 
Devices were invented to manufacture the objects that ffiled the rooms. This 
meant stamping, pressing, punching, and making matrices or dies. Patented in 
1838 were 'means of producing figured surfaces, sunk and in relief, and of print­
17 
ing therefrom and also of moulding, stamping and embossing'; in 1844, there 
is concern with the manufacture 'of blocks for stamping, embossing and mould-
14 British Patent No.550l, 1827. t6 British Patent, No.9841, 1843. 
7 
u Ibid. 
1 British Patent, No.7552, 25 Jan. 1838. 
346 