The fmancial peril in which Swift found himself more than once has its source 
43 
in a business expanding faster than the capital behind it. All his attempted 
expansions center around one aim: hy what channels to enlarge his sphere of 
influence? He demanded the highest precision and operating efficiency," and 
could judge at a glance the quality of the product and the management of the 
shop. In keeping with this was his thorough exploitation of the by-products. 
He is said to have ridden many a time at night to read the thermometer in the 
storage rooms. This was his approach, tno. when, in the late • eighties, he followed 
the retreating cattle belt and huilt hranch factories as far south as Texas. Some­
times he chose places viewed as quite unsuitable, hut through his attention to 
the soil, his observation of what grew, and his judgment of what might grow, 
he could act unerringly." It is a measure of men in any sphere, when they 
join farsightedness with a care for minute detail. 
It was of Armour that Gustavus Swift commented: 'He was exactly what he 
claimed for himself, a horn speculator; he had the faculty to keep a great number 
46 
of irons within the fire at the same time.' Turbulence and confusion pervaded 
the Chicago grain market, where the price of the world's bread was decided. 
Amid this vortex of cracks and crashes, of real or induced panics and semi­
panics, Arnwur passed a quarter-century of overt or concealed operation. Now 
he would 'join the bulls,' now 'thread against the hulls'; now again there would 
be a 'raid on the hears,' now he is on 'the hear side of the market.' It was com­
mon knowledge that a warrant had been issued for his arrest 'for running a 
47 
corner in pork.' His transactions were not merely on paper. He built the 
greatest silos of the world to accommodate them. 
The struggle at this time was waged without gloves. It called for the unbroken 
energy of a fust generation. Armour had $100 in his pocket when, sometimes on 
foot, sometimes by ox-cart, he migrated to California, there to try his luck in 
1851. George Hannnond began a small meat shop, with $13 cash plus a $50 
note, in Chicago in the 'fifties. And Swift began in New England with $25. 
The cautious rentier mentality that betrays later generations -be they 
individuals or nations-- could have brought not a single stone to the building 
.u Louis F. Swift, op.cit. p.113. 
44 Neverthl'less hygienic conditions in the plants were alarming, at least around the turn of the century. 
Decisive reforms were later instituted. The English periodical The Lancet aroused public opinion (7, 14, 
21, and 28 Jan. 1905); it was followed by Upton Sinclair's The Jungle (1906), and by a congressional 
investigation (1906) in the course of which Theodore Roosevelt declared, 'The conditions shown by even 
this short inspection to exist in the Chicago stockyards are revolting' (59th Congres.~, lsi Session, Docu­
ment 873). We are indebted to Mr. \Vayne Andrews for this information. 
45 Swift, op.cit. p.ll8. 
«H. Leech and J. C. Carroll, Armour arulllis Time, New York, 1938, p.238. 
47 
Ibid. p.251. 
226 