There was another factor, too: the automatic manufacture of hread is an 
unusually exacting task. In the second half of the nineteenth century only the 
first and last phases of the process were at hand: kneading machines and eon­
veyor ovens. The middle links were lacking: machines to weigh the dough auto­
matically, to divide it, to make it into balls, roll it, and carry it on endless belts 
through glass-paneled passages exactly controlled for warmth and humidity. 
And modern yeast, which cuts fermentation time ahnost by half, was not yet 
available. 
Mter 1900, as mechanical baking approached readiness for final mechanization, 
all experiments had to go back to the beginning. The astonishingly diverse 
baking ovens of the 'fifties and 'sixties, which clearly developed the principles 
underlying all types, had been forgotten. They belonged to the great reahn of 
shelved inventions. This broken continuity impresses the historian much as 
a mine shaft left unworked and unexploited. 
Around 1907, before a Canadian bakers' eonvention, a Mr. Roberts, represent­
ative of a London baking-oven firm, envisioned what he called an 'oven of the 
future' in which the dough would he put in at one end and the finished bread 
come out of the other." These are the very words we read in the specifications 
of 1850. In his audience was an cuterprising baker, Dent Harrison of West­
mount, Quebec, who became the initiator of the present-day development. At 
that time traveling ovens existed, hut they were used ouly in biscuit-making 
factories. In one of these, at Montreal, Harrison and Roberts baked experi­
mental batches on the traveling oven. The loaves coming out of the other end 
were burned black. Dent Harrison nevertheless continued to think the 'new' 
idea practicable, and gave Roberts an order 'for the first travelling oven in the 
28 
world for baking bread.' 
In 1913 this oven, constructed in England, was set up in Montreal. Its baking 
plate was 50 feet long and 6 feet wide. Fired with coal, it functioned from the 
very start. Thus a century bad elapsed between the 'perpetual oven' (1810), 
invented for the British Navy hy Isaac Coffin, and this tunnel oven, finally 
marking fnll mechanization of the process. 
Baking companies bent upon large-scale production were on the increase and 
began to experiment with similar ovens. Such an oven built in Chicago in 1914-15 
bad to be torn down several times. All were heavy ovens with massive walls of 
brick, weighing heavily on the floor and calling for special foundations. 
Soon gas took the place of coal in heating the ovens; in 1917 a series of gas 
n Gordon E. Harrison, 'The First Travelling Oven,' The Baker's Helper, 50th Anniversary Number, 
17 Apr. 1937, p.832. 
2a Ibid. 
178 