! 
239. J, J SCHUEBLER French Chair for Writing Table, c, 17:m A for('rWmer of lh1• lypni'rila chair 
giving fle:ribM support to the back, 'The back {~padded lo the lw!lou.J of a man's ;;pi!ie and prm•ided with a 
resdienl spr£ng ,'Was to yield backwards wdlwul breaking,' (8chuebler, Nuet.zliche Vor!'.tellung, Nuernberg, 
1730) 
240. Sewing~Machine Chair, 1871, 'Constructed on scientific principlPs to prnwnt many of the diseases 
peculiar to thos(' operating sewing machines, Tfte spindfes DC form a deep recess at the lml'er part of the 
back, Ry this mean.~ lhf' muscles (~f the thighs are relieved from pm~sure whiL1·llhe back just below lht> shoulders 
recei1•es a ~uilable support,' Sealing WILS diJ]erenf(aledfor aery acliuity,fromf!e:rible reapa seals to sewing~ 
machine or barber chairs, ([I S, Palentll4,532, 9 :Hay 1871) 
241. 'The Typewriter\ Ch11ir,' 1896, The type:u:rifer chair is a lafe coma, Backn•ard oscillating m01wment 
wonld hr wronq for the fypisl, who needs only rrsifknl snpporljor h('r back andfreedmn lo tum to lhe riyhl and 
left, ( U, S, Patent 552,502, 7 Jannnry 1896) 
In the 'sixties, as the type approached a standard form, it began to he listed 
8 
as an office ehair. The mechanism, its adjustahilit:y, the regulating of springs, 
are later solved in many ways, without anything really new being added. 
To know how the American would sit if the ruling taste were not master in 
his house, we must watch him at the office; how the desk-chair behaves beneath 
him with almost organic flexibility, and how he unconsciously varies his posture 
\Viihout end. The American seems to have become one ereature with his chair, 
as the Arab with his horse. 
-
No other period knew this mobility, this adjustahility to the body. The 
informal, resilient method of silling, formed of the spirit of the epoch, could 
have been pushed further in admirahle fashion. But ruling taste harred the 
way, for it demanded heavy, circumstantial, furniture. The period failed to 
understand its opportunities, to capture and infuse with artistic blood the 
organic so strongly embodied in this chair. 
The architectural movement around 1920 that made resilient sitting so much 
its concern was based on an altogether different tradition in furniture, while in 
8 
'Offit'.e Chair,' C,S, Patent 67,03-1., 23 July 1867, Here the chair pivots like the arms of a balance. 
405 