The Mechanization of Adornment 
How far were man's intimate surroundings permeated and transmuted by 
mechani7,ation? The question escapes any simple answer and still eludes full 
clarification. It opens upon the sphere of feeling, where things cannot be nar­
rowed to a single interpretation. 
The attack of mechanization was a total one, pouring in from all sides. We 
shall trace its impact upon tbe intimate surroundings along three lines: 
Obvious symptoms will often show how mechanization confused the human 
enviromnent- symptoms such as the industrial reproduction of art ohjecLs, 
the counterfeiting and adulteration of handicraft methods, and a decaying 
sense for materials. From the 'forties on, reformer followed reformer in decry­
ing the persistent evil, hut mechanization proved the stronger, 
Other symptoms lie hidden and unexplored. They were at work beneath the 
surface and cannot be directly apprehended. But they show how mechanizaLion 
is linked to the utensils closest to man's dailv life, furniture. In the section on 
' .. 
tbe Reign of the Upholsterer, we deal with the coming about of this mechanization. 
And lastly, we shall trace the influence of mechanization where it was not 
hampered by fashion, where it proceeded holdly and undeterred: in the types of 
furniture created by needs inh@rent to the century. These possess a vitality 
of their own. In 'The Constituent Furniture of the Nineteenth Century: The 
Furniture of the Engineer,' we shall attempt to point out their significance. 
The guilds produced wares of a eonsistently high standard. The gnild system 
meant a controlled economy. Prices were fixed, and were very high in compari­
son with the hourly wage. Goods were not easily acquired. They embodied 
human as well as material values, and strong personal bonds attached a man 
to his favorite possessions. 
This was the situation when the Industrial Revolution set in. Mechanization 
transformed the objects of everyday use, as well as those serving emotional and 
r.epresentational needs. The wish for adormnent is innate in man and proves 
ineradicable, like hunger or love. 
All depends on how these wishes are satisfied. We are dealing with intangibles, 
which cam10t be proved by dates and figures; yet, the whole nineteenth-century 
development shows how the devaluating of symbols reeoils on man. 
The machines began to pour forth statuary, pictures, vases, flower howls, 
ami carpets in mass. Simultaneously, furniture became bloated and its forms 
dulled. There followed a further packing of the room with all sorts of objects 
called forth by the growing demand for adornment. The less costly it became 
to produce, the more this adornment flourished. 
344 