A century ago Thomas Carlyle stated that the 'fine arts' had got into 'an insane 
condition and walk ahroad without keepers, nobody suspecting their had state, 
and do phantastic tricks.' Art no longer plays 'phantastic tricks.' It tells the 
truth, and often the whole truth. But in nearly every other sphere the means 
have outgrown man and 'walk ahroad without keepers.' 
Before our eyes our cities have swollen into amorphous agglomerations. Their 
traffic has become chaotic, and so has production. The time mechanization 
took to penetrate so many spheres of life was comparatively long. But mechani­
zation is a slow-working process. Today the situation has changed. With 
unhelievahle speed atomic energy sprang from the worksheets and the labora­
tories into reality, playing 'phantastic tricks' and threatening human culture 
with annihilation. 
The idea of progress faded because it stepped down from Turgot's visions to the 
lowest reaches of materialistic interpretation. It no longer corresponded to the 
modern conception of the world. It would have faded anyway. 
The idea of progress supposes a final state of perfection. In the systems of Comte, 
Hegel, and even Marx, the final state was either already reached or was soon to 
come. Finality implies an approaching state of static equilibrium. This con­
tradicts what the scientists have shown to he the essence of the universe, motion 
and unending change. 
Today we do not agree with the moralists of the early Roman Empire, who 
identified progress in material comfort with luxury and corruption. But neither 
can we follow the thinkers of the last two centuries when they assert mankind's 
continuous march toward perfectibility. We can accept only the first part of 
Turgot's sentence: 'Le genre humain [est] toujours le m&me dans ses houleverse­
ments comme I' eau de Ia mer dans les temp~tes ... .' 
The Ending of ~techanistic Conceptions 
Mechanization is the outcome of a mechanistic conception of the world, just as 
technique is the outcome of science. 
Since the beginning of the century we have been in a state of continuous revolu­
tion. During this period political upheavals have moved mainly along lines 
already traced a century before. In every sphere a revolution, arising from the 
depths of our mind, has shattered the mechanistic conception of the world. 
717 