ancient world as Gothic skeleton construction, with its horror of the massive, 
from the he,avy vaults of the thermae. Late medieval living standards could 
have allowed comfort in the sense of convenience. But this thought was foreign 
to the Gothic. The Gothic produced no furniture modeled to the shape of the 
body. In the fifteenth century, low three-legged stools were as much in use as 
in Ilomanesque times. Everything intimates that medieval people nsed to sit 
in improvised and informal fashion. They squatted more often than they sat. 
Seen in sideview, the arch-backed madonnas, sculpted in Ilomanesque times, 
tell how the woman was accustomed to squatting; she did not lean her body 
against the throne back. Only the sculptor sat her on this hierarchic seat. Thus 
too should be understood the richly worked draperies, hung on walls behind 
benches in the thirteenth century, and still seen in I tali an Ilenaissance represen足
tations of the madonna. 
People sat on the hare floor and on cushions. They sat on stairs and on the 
steps leading up to the high-posted beds. Ilomanesque chests- at least the 
few that have come down to us- were for sacred purposes and much too high 
to have been used as seats. AB chests become lower, we will find them aligned 
along the walk They filled the role of chairs and couches. Following this tra足
dition, chairs and tables were made that were also containers, a custom still 
prevalent around 1500. The latter half of the fifteenth century closes the medi足
eval period bnt is still penetrated with the medieval spirit. At the same time 
century -old habits are relaxed and new ones press forward. 
How did people sit in the Middle Ages? A few examples drawn from divers 
countries and social strata of this transition period may give the most direct 
insight into its changing comfort. 
High Court of France, Presided over by Charles Vll, 1458 
This miniature illumination by Jean Fouquet (fig. 139) depicts the sentencing 
to death of the Duke of Alen9on, accused of conspiracy with the English against 
France - a solemn assembly and a solemn moment, as the three months' hear足
ing reaches its conclusion. At the focal point, the king is on his raised seat; to 
his right and left, dignitaries of the reahn, clergy, nobles, and justices are on 
rows of benches. Kneeling before the king is the proclaimer of the death sentence. 
The state proceedings observe the social hierarchy. An umnistakahle solemnity 
pervades this audience, it fills the whole atmosphere: raiment, hearing, the tall 
Gobelin tapestries emblazoned to full height with heraldic figures. 
But what comfort accompanies these proceedings? For three months, from 
August to October, the brilliant court sat closely packed - as always in the 
264 