455. Acrobats. J. B. Basedow, 177-4. In the 1770's there were no Bpecificalfy gymnaBlic exerch;es. The 
educator went io the cirwR fojind examples of bodily control. (Basedow, Elementarwerk, Dessau, 1774) 
closed down shortly after Basedow's death. Yet it had proved faithful to its 
aims. The dignity of man, independent judgment, intellectual freedom, these 
attitudes of the Age of Enlightenment were here introduced for the first time 
into education. By a historical hazard it was at this same place, Dessau, that 
the Bauhaus made the frrst attempts to fuse the artistic thought of our own time 
into pedagogical form. 
Philanthropin had the eulightene,d classes on its side and the clergy against 
it. It dared to advocate the separation of church and state, banned denomina­
tional religious instruction, and taught only what all faiths held in common. 
Lessons in morality took the place of doctrinal teachings. Basedow's four­
volume Elements of Education," with its album which Chodowiecki charmingly 
illustrated with copper plates (fig. 454), sums up the attitudes of the school 
and its training. Typical of the late-eighteenth-century Enlightenment is 
Basedow's dedication of his work to the Prince of Auhalt-Dessau, to Joseph II 
of Austria, to Catherine, Empress of Russia, and to other enlightened rulers, 'at 
whose feet,' it was, in the phrase of the time, 'most humbly laid." 
What interests us here is the stress that Basedow put on balancing education 
of the mind with education of the body. For six hours of elass instruction, there 
were three hours of physical activity, and two of manual training. It is not yet 
systematic exercise of the muscles; it is rather control of bodily movement, in 
which dancing, fencing, riding, swimming, and music are included. Rousseau's 
'return to nature' appears in the hardening cold washing, cool sleeping, early 
rising, and, in sununer, 'living under canvas.' All this is carried out according 
to Basedow's principle that things shall not he learned by military compulsion, 
but in freedom and informality, just as, anticipating later methods, he taught 
the children languages without recourse to grammar. 
asJ. B. Basedow, Elementarwerk, Dessau, 1774,4 vols, and atlas. 
656 