disaster overtook Antiquity, not the least factor, it has been pointed out, were 
those forces which, from the third century on, conspired to drive the Homan 
peasant from his holding and led to the forsaking of the land.' 
Until late into the nineteenth century the farmer was everywhere a home pro足
ducer and home consumer, still embodying the archetype of sedentary mankind. 
When Emerson delivered his address on farming, 'The Man with the Hoe,' at a 
Massachusetts cattle show in 1858, one could imagine that it was one of the 
physiocrats speaking: 
The glory of the farmer is that, in the division oflahors, it is his part to create. All trade 
rests at last on his primitive activity . ... 
. . . He is permanent, clings to his land as the rocks do. In the town where I live, farms 
remain in the same families for seven and eight generations; and most of the first settlers 
[in 1635], should they reappear on the farms today, would find their own blood and names 
still in possession. 
The agriculturalist as Emerson thought of him was the handicraft farmer, the 
'man with the hoe.' 
In that same year (1858) McCormick manufactured 4,095 reapers. By then 
the Middle Western farmer had already" changed in structure, and in the hills 
of Vermont were deserted farmsteads whose owners had gone West. 
Mechanization forever altered the structure of the farmer. From home pro足
ducer and home consumer, carrying his surplus directly to market and dealing 
with the customer, he became a commercial producer altogether dependent 
upon the profit of his goods. The narrow circle of home production is hroken 
as soon as mechanization sets in. In its place enters dependence on the inter足
national market, on the ups and downs of world trade. Now the farmer and 
his produce are exposed to the financial power of all the organizations influenc足
ing the price level. 
The structural change from self-sufficiency to specialization is irresistible. 
To remain in competition, the farmer must narrow himself to specific products. 
In America this trend to specialization set in about a century ago, when cheaper 
wheat from the Middle West appeared in the Eastern states, and converted 
tilled land into pasture. 
Whole regions came to specialize in cattle raising and in dairy farming.' The 
t Michael Rostovtzeff, 'The Decay of the t\ncient World,' Economic History Review, London, 1929, 
vol. n, p.2ll. Setting aside theories of decline caused by exhaustion of the soH or climatic change, 
Rostovtzefi regards the flight from the soil a'> a decisive factor. 
1 
Russell II. Anderson, 'New York Agriculture Meets the West, 1830-1850,' Wisconsin Magazine of 
History, 1932, vol. 16, p.l86. 'By 1840 the wheat which arrived at Buffalo alone was equal to about 30% 
of the New York crop. By 1850 it had increased to over 70% .. .. The New York farmers, with higher 
priced land, poorer soils and increased competition from the cheap lands of the West, were forced to 
change {p.292l ... the forties saw a shift of emphasis from grain to livestock [p.293].' 
131 