ously after mid-century, especially in the early 'sixties, with a second wave of 
advance between 1919 and 1939. We shall briefly discuss the significance of 
these decades. 
Profile of the Decades 
The 'Sixties 
In every domain there arc times that foreshadow future developments with 
extraordinary swiftness, even if a tangible outcome, an intense follow-through, 
is not immediately achieved. The 'sixties in America were such a time. Not 
in great names or in great inventions. But to the period after 1850 we shall 
again and again, in this book, trace impulses and trends that have strongly 
influenced our epoch. 
A collective fervor for invention seems to course through this period. In the 
seventeenth century the inventive urge was possessed hy a limited group of 
scholars -philosophers and savants like Pascal, Descartes, Leihnitz, Huygens, 
or further back, the universal man of the Leonardo type. The orientation that 
was later to sway the masses of the people first takes shape in the minds of the 
few. Until late in the eighteenth century, inventive activity, so far as it found 
record in the British Patent archives, was no more than a trickle. Toward the 
mid-nineteenth century it gained its hold over the broad masses, and perhaps 
nowhere more strongly than in the America of the 'sixties. Invention was in the 
normal course of things. Everyone invented, whoever owned an enterprise sought 
ways and means by which to make his goods more speedily, more perfectly, 
and often of improved beauty. Anonymously and inconspicuously the old tools 
were transformed into modern instruments. Never did the number of inven­
tions per capita of the population exceed its proportion in America of the 'sixties. 
But we must beware of assuming an identity between the inventive urge and 
the degree of industrialization. Such was by no means the case. Taking the 
key industry of the nineteenth century as an index, Europe and particularly 
England arc seen to have been well in the lead. Around mid-century, according 
to the Revue des Deux Mondes," America had 5.5 million power spindles, France 
4 million, and England 18 million. Greater still, even at a later time, was the 
weaving potential of Europe. In 1867 America had over 123,000 power looms, 
13 
France 70,000, and England 750,000.
Whoever wishes to know what was going on in the American psyche at this 
12 Ret'Ue des Deux ll.-fondcs. 1855, IV p.l305. 
13 Blennard, Ilistoire de l'industrie, Paris, 1895, vol. m p.60 ff. 
40 