In the 1870's, the time-consuming method of hitLing the hogs on the head 
with a mallet, and transporting thCin in a stunned condition, was abandoned. 
When instead the living animaL' were suspended by one leg and allowed to 
slide to the killer by means of a conveyor, inventions for 'catching and suspend足
57 
ing hogs' sharply increased. Thanks to this method, the butcher was no longer 
compelled to drive the hog into a corner to deal it a frontal blow. Instead, 
catching and sticking were divided into two operations. One man caught the 
animal hy its hind leg, fastening the chain around it. Now it was a matter of 
hoisting it to the rail as quickly as possible. 
At first this was done in the simplest manner, as seen in the 1873 panorama 
of a Cincinnati slaughterhouse, which shows (fig. 109) the animal being hoisted 
by pulley. With increasing production, more rapid methods were needed in 
order to incorporate the hog in a continuous process and so far as possible at 
regular intervals. The task nmv consisted in ~catching, suspending, and convey足
8 
ing hogs to the plaee where they were to be killed.' '' First it was proposed to 
drive the animals one after the other into a narrow pen and have a helper, unseen 
hy them, quickly loop, around one hind leg, a chain already fastened to the 
conveyor rail, after which they were in one way or another lifted from the ground. 
This might he done, for instance, by an inclined plane at the end of a narrow 
passage. This descending plane turns out to he a rolling carpet set in motion 
as soon as the hog steps onto it. The horizontal top rail thus gradually lifts 
the animal into the desirable position. 
But the animals are quite likely 1o become suspicious before stepping upon 
the inclined plane. Perhaps they will even resist being driven into the narrow 
passageway. A year later, one inventor proposed a slier method: 'It is a pecu足
liarity of hogs that they are only to he driven with exceeding difficulty over 
any new and untried path; but when one has with apparent safety reached a 
point beyond it, especially if he appears to have found food thereby, others can 
59 
he made to follow with much less trouble.' At the end of the pen, he stationed 
a decoy hog before which food was placed. The floor upon which the decoy 
hog stood was solid; the rest was a movable trap section (fig. 117). The chain, 
already hooked to the overhead rail, having been attached to the hog, the floor 
was caused hy a simple mechanism 'to slowly descend until the hogs are com足
pletely suspended, when they slide off. . . . When the hogs are aU out. of the 
57 
Improvement in hog elevators, U.S. Patent 27,363; 6 Mar. 1860. Hog elevator, U.S. Patent 94,076; 
24 Aug. 1369. Hog-lifting machine, U.S. Patent 120,946; 14 Nov. 1871. 
os U.S. Patent 245,643; 16 Aug. 1881. 
~9 U.S. Patent 252,112; 10 Jan. 1882. 
233 