mentions a Boston hotel, the Tremont House, 1827-9, which had 'an elaborate 
battery of water closets and bathrooms with running water in the baseJnent. 
In this building, for the first time in America, if not in the world, mechanical 
93 
equipment becmne an important elentent in architectural design.' The loca­
tion, underground like Scipio's bathroom, is typical for this phase of the develop­
ment, when running water was not yet piped to the floors. 
We have but an exterior view (fig. 437) and a half ironical, half-admiring 
description of an American hotel that bad equipped all its rooms with a bath 
and running water within the room. This was the Mount Vernon Hotel at Cape 
May, New Jersey, a sea-bathing resort (1853). 'Jonathan is as great in hotels 
as he is in everything else -- sea-serpents and boiler explosions included,' we 
read in the Illustrated London News, 17 September 1853. 'The hotel contains 
125 miles of gas- and water-pipes. Every guest bas his bath in his bedroom, 
and there are hot and cold water taps for his use when he pleases .. .' The 
informant may have exaggerated details, but even at this date the basic American 
tendency to think of the bath as the appnrtenance of every bedroom is cliseern­
ible. The trend found in the Mount Vernon Hotel also appears, combined with 
a small built-in kitchen or kitchenette, in Catherine Beecher's flat of the late 
'sixties (fig. 489). The tendency to combine plumbing units into the smallest 
space is continued in the later American development, as illustrated by onr 
typical New York one-room apartment (fig. 490). 
The goal, a bath to every bedroom, stood little chance of rapid achievement. 
Indeed the process took over half a century to complete. 
94 
Onr knowledge of the development is fragmerrtary. In 1877 a Boston hotel 
had running hot and cold water in all rooms, but only for washbasins." A 
family hotel in Kansas City (1888) and another in Boston (1894) added bath­
rooms to their suites but not to their individual rooms." At a time when Pull­
man was running his private sleeping cars, these bathrooms must have repre­
sented a similar luxury. 
Democratization of the hotel bath cannot truly be spoken of before a bath 
became available at slight cost with every room. In 1908 Ellsworth M. Statler 
~Talbot Hamlin, Creek Revival Archileclnre in America, New York, 19.14, p.l29, with illustration of 
the ground plan. The next step was' the private bath as a fixed part of hotel service,' which, says JeJf(~r~ 
son Williamson (op.cit. p.55), 'first appeared in 1844, when the aristocratic New York Hotel was opening.' 
This, incidentally, was the year London founded its 'Society for promoting the cleanliness of the poor.' 
94 
No systematic researches are available. American hotels and American sanitary fixture manufac~ 
turers should show pride enough to produce a thorough and systematic study of the coming about of 
their present-day standards. 
%Jefferson Williamson, op.cit. p.54. 
96 Ibid. p.62. 
694 