418. 'Water Witch' Motor, c.l910. 'Set tem­
porarily in the kitchen sink, bathtub, or wherever a 
water faucet and drain are convenient. Operated by 
ordinary wafer pressure; weighs less than 23 
pounds; dust and germs automatically mixed with 
wafer and carried away; absolutely safe; sells for 
$75.00. All other efficient portable cleaners re­
quire electricity for operation.' (Leaflet, Collection 
Tum J. Smiih, Jr.) 
419. 'Pneumatic Cleaner' Used as Hair Drier, 1909. • Using the current of pure, fre3h a~:r from the 
exhaust.' The electric cleaner here is the lank type, then rapidly reaching standard form. (Collection 
Tom J. Smith, Jr.) 
The specialists were skeptical throughout. Around 1912 they thoroughly 
disbelieved that a smaller and more dependable Lype was possihle. One of 
them makes the point particularly clear hy refusing to show or to demonstrate 
46 
portahle machines.l Another, who thoroughly treats the vacuum cleaner 
147 
question in his time, is somewhat less emphaLic (1913): 'It will he the survival 
of the fittest.' The vacuum cleaner, he believed, 'is at the height of its career 
like the automobile.' 
The skepticism of the experts was not wholly unfounded. ThL• is evidenced 
by the diversity of attempts to find an adequate motor and satisfactory portahle 
form. In 1910 the stationary installations, with suction pmnp and dust separator 
in the cellar, were mainly used in residences. Numerous catalogues of their 
148 
time have been preserved. The master of the house is shown in the parlor 
having the butler give his coat a few strokes of the vacuum; on the floor above 
146 
Arthur Summerton, A Treatise on Vacuum Cleaning, London, 1912: 'We shall confine this treatise 
to the stationary system as we believe satisfactory results in cleaning cannot be expected from portable 
147 
machines.' Cooley, op.cit. p.20. 
148 Mr. Tom J. Smith, Jr. of Cleveland, Ohio, Vice President of the Pressed Metal Institute and a 
veteran of the vacuum-cleaner business, instead of buying his prospective customer drinks at the bar, 
would get him interested in the history of the product. Later he gathered the material in more permanent 
form. He and Mr. C. G. Frantz, secretary since its beginning of the Vacuum Cleaner Manufacturers• 
Assn., and collector of comprehensive archives, have most obligingly and helpfully answered our enquiries. 
592 