ing buildings, we are told, 'was undouhtL'<ily in the fonn of an open jet for dis­
133 
lodging dust from carvings.' 
American machines that blew compressed air into the carpet were also demon­
strated to the public of other countries. In one of his few references to himself, 
the Englishman Booth recalls: 'My attention was first directed UJ the mechan­
ical removal of dust from carpets in 1901 through a demonstration of an Ameri­
can machine hy its inventor. . . . The machine consisted of a hox to which 
compressed air was supplied, the air was hlowu down in the carpet from two 
134 
opposite directions.' 
As we see, it is hard to ascertain where a satisfactory vacuum cleaner first 
came into being. The English name Booth as the inventor of the first machine 
135 
operating exclusively hy suction. His device was patented in 1901 and suc­
cessfully introduced. The inventor clairas as his own the idea of using suction 
hy itself, having been stimulated. hy demonstrations of those American machines 
that blew air into the carpet. Booth suggested that the American try blowing 
in the opposite way, and he attempted 'the experiment of sucking with my 
mouth against the hack of a plush seat in a restaurant in Victoria Street with 
6 
the result that I was almost choked ... ,13 There is no doubt that Booth made 
his invention ind.ependently, not finding out until later that a long series of 
nineteenth-century patents had traveled the same path. In his reminiscences 
upon • the origin of the vacuum clt:'.aner,' he gives an interesting enumeration of 
early patents. Booth's machine of 1901 was a mobile one, mounted on a 
pushcartY' 
Shortly after 1900 the French too, as the illustration shows, were building 
compact machines driven hy electric motors and mounted on wheelcarts. They 
clain1 the invention of a nozzle (which Booth clairas as his) for use in cleaning 
their furniture. Booth claims moreover to have been the earliest to introduce 
this comhination of hose and handle. In France such machines seem to have 
been originally used for cleaning theater seats. Two hundred and seventeen 
13
l Cooley, op.cit. p.4. Mr. Joseph II. Young, the superintendent for the Union Pacific at Salt Lake 
City, and David Patterson, master mechanic, attempted in 1892-3 to clean car interiors hy coupling 
together a number of air-brake pumps so as to blow away the dust. As this proved impracticable, they 
worked out a syphon method, whereby air was sucked up and blown out of the window, with such success 
that it was generally adopted by the Union Pacific for cleaning coaches and Pullman cars at its passenger 
terminals. They also developed a nozzle to spray paint on freight cars and wooden buildings, a procedure 
that was adopted for painting ships. A patent was denied, however, on the ground that the principle was 
covered by patents that blew oil from a tank hy compressed air to kindle fires in loC'-Omotive fire boxes. 
We owe this information to Mr. Young, now vice-president of the Westinghouse Brake Co. 
U4 Booth, op.cit. p.85. 
~~British Patent No.17,4a3, 30 Aug. 1901. 
136 Booth, op.cit. p.86. 
1s1 Illustrations, ibid. pl. XI. 
588 