of these giant concerns. All this called for men ready for danger, ready to win 
or to lose. There was no middle course. It was a staking of all against all. 
The key to large-scale production in Swift and Armour's time was the refrig­
erator car. At first it met the opposition of those who stood most to profit by 
it. The railroads conld see no reason to he drawn into doubtful experiments 
for the packer's benefit, which if successful would cut their freight by half. 
What would they do w:ith the tremendous pool of rolling stock that conveyed 
live mttle to the eastern cities? Why should the railroads help to decrease their 
ow:n profits and at the same time render their equipment obsolete? But the 
development proved the stronger. Forcing the packers to build their own cars 
48 
helped little; indeed, it was this that gave rise to the 'private car lines,' which 
directly and indirectly yielded high returns to the packers. 
the task of converting the butchers in the East from their 
Then there was 
handicraft into salesmen of chilled meat. This was achieved directly after the 
refrigerator cars were put into successful operation. The packers can 'sell a 
superior "cut" at a lower cost than tbe butcher can sell an inferior "cut" taken 
49 
from an animal killed in his own slaughter house.' 
With the same energy, the struggle was carried on in the home city, and was 
later extended to the other packing centers. The smaller firms were absorbed, 
bought ont, or in other ways forced to the wall. 
Armour's interest in the refrigerator car began only when it had proved its 
success. Then he went in for it with more than usual energy. The end of the 
'eighties saw attempts to bring the fruit of newly flourishing California to the 
50 
East under refrigeration. Soon enormous profits were promised. This drew 
Armour's attention (c.l390). He entered the contest as in the grain market 
and - as yet without customers - ordered a thousand cars and more. He 
formed a partnership with one company, absorbed others, often at high cost, 
while others he forced into retirement. The company that made the first success­
51 
ful trials in transporting fruit from California fell by the wayside. During 
52 
the 'nineties the Annour car lines, operating under various names, became the 
most powerful, 
The perspectives broadened, the dimensions grew, until the point came into 
sight when capture of the whole provision market - fruit, grain, meat - seemed 
48 
Louis D. "\Veld, Private Freight Cars and American Railways, Columbia University Studies in History, 
Economics and Public Law, New York, 1908, vol. 31, no. l. 
H J. Ogden Armour, Packers, The Private Car Lines and the People, Philadelphia, 1906, p.24. 
so 'The first refrigerator line of any importance operated only for the fruit traffic, was that of F. A. 
Thomas in Chicago, a Detroitinventorwho built fifty refrigerator cars in 1886.' Cf. L. D. Weld, op.cit. p.18. 
51 Ibid. p.l9. Through the cutting of freight rates. 
a2 Armour Car Line, Fruit Growers' Express, Continental Fruit E:x'}}ress. 
227 