Agriculture, 1791."' Arthur Young was its secretary. Their intention was to 
educate the country in the fundamentals of agriculture. But when farming sank 
into a mood of resignation in the 'twenties, the hoard lost its vitality. The moral 
prestige of this hody may have inspired the United States Department of Agri­
culture, which since its beginnings in 1862 has increasingly shaped the theory 
and practice of American farming, fulfilling a more effective role than similar 
bodies in other countries. For the beginnings of the textile industry, we must 
fall hack upon fragmentary clues. For the state of English agriculture, we have 
the thoroPgh documentation of its spokesmen, Young and Sinclair." Conserva­
tive in outlook, Sinclair had at the same time cosmopolitan plans. He wished 
for international control of inventions 'with the purpose of spreading knowledge 
of new invention and discoveries throughout the world for the free use of all' 
25 
(1795).
Of mechanical inventions for agriculture, there was no dearth. All the ele­
ments of the McCormick reaper had heen embodied in English patents hy the 
end of the eighteenth century and the first decades of the nineteenth. But no 
power was present to draw them together. They remaineil unexploited. Neither 
did the expansion of the estates alter this situation. Around 1830 the movement 
ended in temporary resignation, while the textile industry, that outsider, began 
to show a power the equal of which was never before seen in any domain of 
production. Yet the eighteenth century's efforts to intensify agriculture did 
not remain fruitless. English agriculture had risen to an extraordinary status. 
'Rarely will the traveller come upon a land where the aspect of the country­
side impresses the beholder more favorably,' writes a German agriculturalist 
in 1845. 'Seen from any height, an English agricultural county has the appear­
ance of a vast rich garden: the large fields ... surrounded hy growing hedges, 
the powerful teams drawing elegant and handsome implements, the fioe herds 
of milch cows at pasture ... the cleanly dwellings of the tenants amid the 
2
orchards and grain fields ... .' ' 
What a contrast with the American landscape at this time! Boundless stretches 
of wilderness, virgin soil- this, after all, is what seemed indispensable for the 
211 John Sindair, Aceonni of the Origin of the Board of Agriculture and .ll3 Progress for Three Years after 
I h Establishment, London, 1793. 
24 Cf. Collection in the British Museum referred to in Witt Bowden, Industrial Society in England 
Tmvards the End of the Eighteenth Century, New York, 1925, pp.3I6--l7. 
2s Ibid. pp.34-5. 
6 
2 Wilhelm von Hamm, Die Landwirtschafllichen Maschinen und Geraete Englan.d8, Braunschweig, 
1~45. 
140 