THE CONSTITUENT FURNITLRE OF THE NINETEENTH 
CENTURY 
As OUTLINED in Space, Time and Architecture we distinguish two categories of 
historical facts. One category we call constituent, the other we call transitory. 
'l'he distinction hecomes necessary if the historian is seen as not exclusively 
mncerned with individual sty lcs and periods and with the comparison of their 
similarities and differences: if one sees histnry, like biology, as concerned with 
the problem of growth and development~ not to he confused with progress. 
Certain tools of analysis must be granted to the historian, and he must use 
them with care and discernment. Thus he dra"s a line around the short-lived 
facts, those performances that lack creative force and invention. They are the 
transitory facts. For contemporaries they may hold the fascination of a fire­
works display and succeed in taking over the center of the stage, as did the ruling 
taste in painting, architecture, or furniture during the nineteenth century. 
The constituent facts, on the other hand, are marked by creative force and 
invention; by accumulation and accretion they form the core of historical growth. 
Surveying the nineteenth century, the historian who has accepted history as 
a problem of growth is inevitably led to find patent furniture the constituent 
furniture of its period. 
Patent Furniture and Ruling Taste 
The furniture of the ruling taste, like the painting of the ruling taste, is an 
outgro\\th of fashion. Every period shapes life to its own image and drapes 
it in forms peculiar to itself. By a historical necessity, each fashion~ indeed 
every style~ is bounded within its own limited time. But across and beyond 
this circumscribed period !J:Jcre enters another factor, of fluctuating intensity: 
This is the quantum of constituent elements, of fresh impulses generated within 
the period. In them lies the historical import of an era. They can wither from 
memory perhaps for centuries, as did the antique heritage. But at a certain 
time they come up again in man's consciousness, reaffirm their reality, and form 
the solid ground for new departures. So, for instance, the Renaissance used 
Antiquity as its springboard, and so in recent decades, the study of primitive 
man furthered insight into repressed instincts. 
It was the ill fortune of the nineteenth century that the art and furniture of 
its ruling taste seldom found access to the absolute, the genuinely inventive. In 
the course of time, artistic and historical journeys may reveal other aspects, 
as the surrealist painters have aheady discovered. The mixture of hanality and 
389 