time "ill find evidence not only in American folk-art. The activity of the anon­
ymous inventor is more revealing. But only a fraction of the popular hahit of 
invention is preserved in the Patent Oi!ice. If we turn so often to the patent 
drawings, it is as objective witnesses, although the drawings in themselves often 
have an artistic directness that distinguishes them from the technical routine 
of a later time. In them no small portion of folk-art lies concealed. 
In the American patent lists of the late 'thirties, few schemes for the improve­
ment of steam engines or of textile manufacture are to be found, whereas ideas 
for facilitating the complicated handicrafts and initial efforts to mechanize 
human surroundings are conspicuous. This becomes truly evident in the 'sixties, 
in agriculture, in hreadmaking, in the mass processing of meat, in the household. 
Mechanization penetrated many areas with success. For others, like the house­
hold, the time had not yet come. From this period, however, it was but a step 
to the time of full mechanization, which realized what the 'sixties had 
foreshadowed. 
1'he 1'ime of Full Mechanization, 1913-39 
We designate the period between the two World Wars as the time of full 
mechanization. The development is too fluid to be tied within strict limits. 
Before 1918 full mechanization was aheady setting in, and it was by no means 
ending in 1939. Even within these years there are times of widely varying 
intensity. Yet with good warrant one may call the era het ween the wars the 
time of full mechanization. 
Our point of view is too close to allow a total reckoning of what happened 
in these two decades, or of what the consequences may be to us. This much, 
however, is certain: at one sweep, mechanization penetrates the intimate spheres of 
life. 'What the preceding century and a half had initiated, and especially what 
had been germinating from mid-nineteenth century on, suddenly ripens and 
meets life with its full impact. 
True, changes affected living as soon as mechanization announced itself in 
the early nineteenth century; yet the influence was limited to fairly narrow 
areas, to those places such as Manchester, Roubaix, Lille, where the large textile 
factories began to flourish and, with their slums, nndermined the structure of 
the whole city. The greater body of life was left undisturbed. 
Never, as we shall see later, was the standard of English agriculture more 
enthusiastically praised than aronnd mid-nineteenth century. On the Con­
tinent too the farming population, even of the industrialized nations, outnum­
bered that of all other occupations. In the United States in 1850, ahont 85 per 
cent of the population was rural, and only 15 per cent urban. This ratio began 
41 