More significant were Marey's earlier experiments with the portrayal of 
movement in its own right, movement detached from the performer. It was 
not Marey who carried this thought to its conclusion. But his trajectories of 
a hird's wing (c.1835) and of a man walking (c.1890) deserve a place in the his­
torical record. 
To visualize movement as it evolves in space, Marcy first tried descrihing his 
name in mid-air with a shiny metal hall, and found his signature clearly written 
on the plate. He attached a strip of white paper to the wing of a crow, which 
he let fly before a hlaek background (c.1885). The trajectory of each wing heat 
appeared as a luminous path (fig. 18). Around 1890 he placed a brilliant point 
at the base of the lumhar vertehrae of a man walking away from the camera 
(fig. 17). In a later lecture (1899) he speaks of these curves as 'a luminous trail, 
14 
an image without end, at once manifold and individua1.' This scientist sees 
his objects with the sensihility of a Mallarme. Marey called his procedure 'time 
photography' (chrorwphotographie); its ohject is to render visihle 'movements 
that the human eye cannot perceive.' 
For lack of technical means these early promises did not reach full maturity. 
'The fnllihnent was to come from elsewhere, from the industrial sphere. This 
occurred around 1912, in 'scientific management.' The ohject was to record a 
given motion cycle in utmost detail. Only thus could one accurately observe 
the work process. Jlor the first time, images of pure motion are obtained with 
entire precision- images giving a full account of the hand's behavior as it 
accomplishes its task. We see into a closed domain. Frank B. Gilbreth, the 
American production engineer, built up this method step hy step around 1912 
and achieved the visualization of movement. How this investigation proc,eeded, 
and what parallels simultaneously arose in painting, the section on Scientific 
Management and Contemporary Art will attempt to show. 
Movement Investigated 
A line leads from the fourteenth century to the present: Oresme - Descartes 
- Marey- Gilbreth: The theologian-philosopher- the mathematician-phi­
losopher- the physiologist- the production engineer. Three of these men 
arose in the country that is outstanding for visualization in all of its domains. 
The fourth, an American, appeared as soon as efficiency demanded knowledge 
of 'the one hest way to do work.' 
Nicolas Oresme, Bishop of Lisieux, was the first investigator t<> represent in 
graphic form the ceaselessly changing: movement. 
1
4Jbid. p. 11. 
24 