The quest for total regeneration, which, in earlier cultnres, gave rise to refined 
bath methods, was doomed to failnre in onr period. The mechanized, mass­
produced tub triumphed. It is a product of the industrial era. England and 
America, the two countries most closely bound up with industrialization, took 
the lead in formulating the present-day type of bathing. England held the fore 
during the nineteenth century and America in the twentieth, in the time of full 
mechanization. Although there are no sharp boundaries, differences clearly 
mark off the English type from the American. 
Before investigating these, bnwever, we shall attempt to show how, here too, 
the universal approach was destined to bow before the specialistic. 
Hydropathy and the Return to Nature 
The nineteenth centnry, we must never fail to stress, has more than one side. 
In many of its manifestations, particularly in its first half, a parcel of universalism 
lives on. Consideration of man's nature as a totality- the late eighteenth­
century aim- gave rise, around 1830, to a method uniting therapy with the 
return to nature. Central in the discussion stands a Silesian peasant, Vincenz 
Priessnitz, who shunned medicaments and healed by water. 
Around 1770 Pestalozzi bad turneAI farmer to discover for himself in this 
calling 'the power of natnre more vital and alive.' But now, by 1830, a peasant 
lad, such as Vincenz Priessnitz (1799-1851), who had never studied, who never 
bnthered with academic medicine, and who often did not even know how his 
prescriptions cnred, could win world-wide fame at Graefenhcrg, amid the woods 
of his native Silesia. In America at this time a Presbyterian minister, Sylvester 
Graham, sought, as we recall, to bring man into agreement with his nature 
through unadulterated nutrition. 
In full post-Metternichian period, one might have come upon the following 
sight in the pine forests, a balf-honr's walk beyond Graefeuberg: In the open 
air and in all weathers, la<lies of the Austrian aristocracy, 'their bodies com­
45 
pletely naked,' expose themselves beneath a strean1 of water, thick as one's 
arm, cascading from the height of ten or twenty feet. It is spring water sporting 
from wooden pipes, which channel it straight out of the mountain side. Six 
u R. J, Scoutetten, De l'eau, ou de l'hydrolherapie, Paris, 1843. Scoutetten was a learned French army 
doctor whom the French Government sent to Graefenberg. 
660 