Paris, 'The sculptor must allow himself to he led hy the material; the material 
will tell him what be should do.' This is even truer of the historian's task. 
In the present case a problem arose: What does the patent furniture imply? 
It soon heeame clear that we had to broaden our basis of approach and again 
raise the question: How does man's posture in the nineteenth century differ 
from that of earlier periods? If a new manner of sitting developed, we shall 
have to decide whether patent furniture, the furniture of the engineer, offered 
better solutions than did the furniture of the ruling taste. This complexity will 
be found to center around adaptability. 
The second problem of patent furniture will center around convertibility. 
Multiple functions are performed by each piece. Hence are found combinations 
of the most heterogeneous elements, sometimes even a naive mimicry. 
The development of the sleeping car will warrant our special attention, as a 
rare case of convertible furniture coming down in unbroken tradition to our 
own day. And we shall not overlook the hammock, which may seem to lie at 
the most distant pole of aesthetic interest: its handling hy the Americans of the 
early 'eighties reveals that hovering and inforn1al posture to which the nineteenth 
century is unconsciously drawn. 
Furniture for the Middle Classes 
Here the transitory types of the ruling taste and the constituent types of the 
engineer meet face-to-face. 
In architecture, the nineteenth century meant the rule of pseudo-monumen­
tality. Monumental forms were indiscriminately used everywhere and anywhere, 
from public edifices to the lowest tenement. This same orientation was respon­
the furniture of the ruling taste, with its exrA\ss of decoration and orna­
sible for 
mentation. Things that only the topmost classes had been able to purchase, 
mechanization now made available to everyone. True, in the long run, this 
palatial style could not continue to thrive in three rooms. But the insignia of 
wealth and panoply wield a fascination that, for a considerable while, may inhibit 
healthier instincts. 
The other side of the nineteenth century is embodied in the structures of the 
engineer, in the furniture of the engineer. Patent furniture consists of types 
evolved by the middle brackets for their own urgent needs. Wealthy people 
had no call for a lounge convertible into a LTadle, or a bed convertible into a 
wardrobe. They owned both the space and the means to satisfy their needs in 
other ways. The patent furniture arose, in America at least, from the demands 
of an intermediate class that wished, without over-LTowding, to bring a modicum 
of comfort into a minimum of space. The chair that converts into a lounge, the 
395 