So long as only Pennsylvania or the New England States were settled, it 
was possible to preserve the customary European scale: small-farming, self­
contained, independent farmsteads. The cities were modest in compass, but 
lay within easy reach of the cattle-raising districts; numerous villages were 
scattered through the countryside. Agriculture and stock farming followed the 
traditions brought over from Europe. But after the war of 1812, as soon as 
the settlers passed the crest of the Alleghenies and encountered American dimen­
sious, the situation altogether changed. It was easy to raise great herds of swine, 
sheep, or cattle, but no consumers lived near by. On the spot, the products 
had no value: The herds had to be driven across wide stretches and over the 
mountains to the towns in the East, regardless of all hazards and losses. 
These ~xtremes of sparsely populated areas far from the consmning centers 
persisted in America until well into the latter half of the nineteenth century. 
Such contrast between urban concentration and gigantic undeveloped regions 
did not exist in Europe. To this day in Europe the meat supply is largely local, 
while in America producer and consumer live far apart. 
Technical conditions have changed in the course of the century. But, around 
1820, as soon as slaughtering tended to concentrate in one locality, Cincinnati, 
which could not itself consume the products hut was forced to export them, the 
rai.•on d'etre of the American meat industry became clear. It operates on the 
assumption that vast areas of the land shall draw their provision of meat from 
a central place. The meat was either moved on the hoof or shipped, salted in 
barrels, down the Mississippi. Later on, when Chicago gained ascendancy in 
the 'sixties, the cattle were loaded into freight cars to be moved East; finally, 
at the beginning of the 'eighties, the supply system of today was set up, and 
refrigerator cars distributed the dressed carcasses to the various centers of 
consumption. 
From these beginnings developed the largest industry of the United States, 
as measured by turnover, 3.3 billion dollars (in 1937), and with a production of 
some 50 million pounds a day. 
The Beginnings of Mechanization: Cincinnati (I83o-60) 
It is still uncertain how the separate phases slowly emerged to build up a 
meat industry of continental proportions, the whole form and operation of which 
make it ahnost a precision instrument. The drive and inventiveness it repre­
sents can he judgeA by comparison to the same industry in South America. 
Some insight into the way it evolved is nevertheless possible today. 
The industry has its origin in the State of Ohio, center of production during 
214 