with the Oriental preference for steam bathing, two such maghias, steamed to 
different temperatures, usually radiated from the beil-al-harara, 
The ministration of the bath, as outlined by the ground plan (fig. 446) pro­
ceeds thus: from the divesting room (apodyterium, maslak)- the tepidarium 
has become a mere passageway- to the domed hot-air room (caldarium, beii­
al-harara), where limbering and special massages are administered; hence to the 
steam bath (maghias); finally a soap massage, and return to the maslak for a 
rest. 
16 
Islam found itE basic scheme in the thermae of third- to sixth-century Syria. 
Here the balance has already shifted. Disappearance of the palestra and frigi­
darium; dominance of the apodyterinm (divesting and resting ball); dwarfing of 
the tepidarinm; and increased importance of the ealdarium. Hypoeausts and 
double walls are already lacking. In comparison with the Roman buildings, 
everything is on an extremely reduced seale. The baths of early Christian times 
in Syria are to the thermae of imperial Rome what a primitive Romanesque 
mountain chapel is to the finesse of a Romanesque cathedral. Everything is pro­
vincially simplified, but at the same time adjusted to new surroundings. Here 
the provincialized version gave rise to a fresh development, as so often in his­
tory when foreign influences renew an older pattern. 
When the Mohammedans shaped their own haths in the eighth century," 
they instilled new life into the Syrian institutions. The builders of the earliest 
Islamic haths were Omayyad caliphs, who still preserved a half-bedouin way of 
life. They despised the shut-in and ordered life of cities. This trait was common 
to the Arabic conquerors everywhere: in Mesopotamia, in Egypt, and likewise 
in Syria. The bath of Kusair' Amra, near the Dead Sea, stands isolated in the 
desert wastes like a hotel among the glaciers. The initial chamber (apodyterium, 
maslak), for all its modesty of size, becomes a social hall with a gallery and 
delicate murals. The actual bath chambers, on the other hand, lose some of 
their importance. The dominant mood is undeniably one of intimacy, an atmos­
phere that was not lost even when, as time went on, the Islamic bath grew in 
seale. As in the Syrian prototypes the rooms form a continuous sequence. The 
caliph's bath in the Alhambra at Granada (fourteenth century), still follows this 
pattern. Alongside these, cruciform ground plans develop, as in the hammams 
18 
of Cairo, which a French archeologist has so precisely revealed to us. Here 
the domed caldarium (fig. 447) (beit-al-harara) becomes the architectural center. 
1& De Vogue, Syrie Centrale, Edifices chrldiens el architecture civile du fVm• au VIJme sietle, pp.55-7. 
Pauty, op.cit. pp.l4ff. 
17 Cf. Pauty, op.cit. p.l7. Ruins of Kusair' AmrR, built by an Omayyad c::aliph before 715. Aiso 
As-Sakarh, discovered in 1905. 
1s Pauty, op.cit. 
642 