assembly line), transportation and storage facilities (railroads, refrigerator cars, 
and refrigerated storehouses) were developed side by side. 
When a modest settlement, Chicago had a local area of supply. In 1839, 
'3000 head of cattle bad been driven in from the neighhouring prairies, barrelled, 
22 
and exported.' Soon the near-by Midwestern states were ineluded; this area 
of supply likewise proved inadequate. 
The great plains west of the Mississippi, stretching from the Gulf of Mexico 
almost to the Canadian border, were transformed, in little over a decade, 
into a gigantic reservoir of cattle. The wave moved from the South upwards. 
There, the Spanish coloni,ts had already bred their Texas Longhorns. In the 
brief period from the Civil War to 1876, the herds spread over the plains of 
twelve states. On the prairie, there were no boundaries, no fences; the range 
was master less and free. 'The rapidity of this expansion has perhaps no parallel 
in all American history.' " 
The same question that faced Cincinnati about 1830 arises once more in the 
giant domains of the Cattle Kingdom: What is to be done with the surplus? 
How are the purchasers to be reached? 
Only hazardous trails were available on which to drive the cattle to the buyers. 
Faced with these almost insuperable distances, even the cattle dealers became 
plauuers aud strategists. The most talented of them all, the Chicagoan 
J. G. McCoy, bending over maps, calculated~ 'where the cattle trail from Texas 
24 
would cut the railroads then pushing west.' An abandoned settlement, Abilene, 
in Kansas, north of Texas, seemed the most favorable point. 1 t consisted of 
twelve shacks; prairie dogs were bred there. Within sixty days McCoy had 
provided acconnnodation for over 3000 bead of cattle (1867). In autumn of 
the same year, he shipped 35,000 head. Nearly every train was bound for Chicago. 
By 1869 the figure had nmltiplied tenfold, and in 1871, some 700,000 head were 
consigned to the packinghouses of the Middle West. 
THE REFRIGERATOR CAR AND STOREHOUSE 
Parallel with the forrnation of this reservoir of cattle ran many-sided experi­
ments seeking to create the machinery needed for the mass processing of the 
animals. We shall later examine more closely certain phases of this achieve­
ment, for ouly thus can we gain insight into the methods that were tried. 
Chicago remained isolated for a comparatively long while. Not until 1856 
did it receive its first railway link with the eastern cities. With the mid-century 
n Parton, op.cit. p.44. 
llliWalter Prescott Webb, The Great PlainS', Boston, 1936, p.207. 
2,j Webb, op.cit. p.219. 
219 