during the time of the great expansion, an English source assures emigrants: 
32 
'Not a tenth of the soil is yet cultivated,' 
The leap from a primitive, colonial mode of living into highly organized 
mechanization is typical for the whole American development, Two centuries 
elapsed hefore this leap hecame possible. 
Once again, hut compressed within a few decades, the process was repeated 
when the pioneers advanced into the Middle West early in the nineteenth cen­
tury, Ahnost as in the seventeenth, these settlers were left upon their own 
resources, without help and without communication, They were content to 
survive. Whatever the pioneers needed, they had to hring in with them. 'Their 
oxcarts were loaded with tools, seeds, poultry, utensils and sin•ple furniture, 
livestock were driven along,' They were self-sufficient and lived from hand to 
mouth. They set1led near the fringes of the woods. There was game in abun­
dance. In Autumn, it is said, they sometimes hurned down woods, or set fire 
to the prairie for easier hunting." 
And, as in colonial times, the settlers used wooden implements and utensils, 
wood.en plows, wooden harrows with hickory sticks, mostly of their own fashion­
ing. The primitive prairie plow, the hull-tongue plow, was used in southern 
4 
Illinois, it is said, down to 1850.' 'Most cultivators do everything for them­
selves,' observes an Englishman who traveled throngh Ohio in 1818, 'even to the 
35 
fabrication of agricultural implements,' 
The mid-century in the Middle West hrings the sudden leap from home 
economy to mechanized production, A mechanization of agriculture sets in, 
such as had existed nowhere hefore. To the account of his journey through 
southern Illinois in 1833, Patrick Shirreff appends this remark: 'A reaping 
machine was used at Jacksonville in 1834 and it is on the !awned surface of the 
prairie where this and almost every other description of agricultural machinery 
36 
can be used with advantage,' Here too the Scot farmer saw unerringly: it 
was the smooth, lawn-like surface of the prairie that called for mechanical reapers 
and 'every other description of agricultural machinery,' 
This solitary reaper of 1834 is qnite comparahle to the 78 hushcls shipped from 
Chicago in 1838, The amount of grain produced grows in ratio with the numher 
of machines, The curve hegins sharply to rise in the mid 'fifties. Chicago 
shipped ten million hushels in 1860; twenty million in the Civil War years, 
SSJarnes Caird, M.P., A Brief Description of the Prairies of Illirwis, London, 1859, p.4. 
33 Hubert Schmidt, 'Farming in Illinois a Century Ago as Illustrated in Bond County,' in JoU1'1Ull of 
IUirwis State Historical Society, Springfield, Illinois, vol. 31, 1938, p.l42. 
u Ibid. 
:~&The Farm Ceniennialllislory of Ohio, 1803-1903, Dept. of Agriculture, Springfield, Ohio, 1904, p.lO. 
aa Shirrell', op.cit. p.463. 
144 