Attempts were made to increase production in two ways. 
One was the use of draw plates. which could he thrust into the oven or taken 
out by unskilled workers with a single motion. This type has been preserved 
fmd developed in the most varied forms. 
The decisive step toward mass production lies in the use of a continuously run­
ning mechanism. Many possibilities were considered for equipping the baking 
chamber with moving devices. In one variety this was done by means of hori­
zontally or vertically rotating wheels. Wheels revolving around a vertical axle 
have been retained up to the present time in mechanical pie baking. This means 
that the hearth plate, which normally was fixed, becomes movahle; it is trans­
formed into a wheel. This type of thinking seems to have hecorne possible only 
in the nineteenth century. The eighteenth century had toyed with the idea of 
mobility. Inl733 an English patent was issued for a cast-iron oven in which the 
hearth plate remained fixed, but the oven itself revolved." In 1351, I. F. Rolland 
22 
invented the modern form of the rotary oven with the movable wheels. 
Wheels revolving around a horizontal axle allowed the baking trays to remain 
horizontal, much like the cars of the giant Ferris wheel at the Chicago Exposition 
of 1393. 
But far more persistent were the efforts to obtain a continuous flow hy building 
a chain conveyor through the baking chamber. Between 1350 and 1360, the 
most diverse solutions were attempted: chains running horizontally, chains 
running vertically, singly, or in series, until, by the early 'sixties, the bake oven 
of 1300 had become a highly complicated mechanism. 
The first use of the endless chain occurs surprisingly early. In the first decade 
of the nineteenth century, Admiral Sir Isaac Coffin (1759~1339) built for the 
British Navy an oven 'intended for baking sea-biscuits' (figs. 99, 101) which he 
23 
named the 'perpetual oven.' His invention falls at the end of his long and ad­
venturous career, when, forced out of active service hy the consequences of an 
'accidental strain,' he had become superintendent of Portsmouth navy yard. 
The Portsmouth 'victualling office' has been mentioned earlier in connection 
with important innovations. 
Coffin thus explains the name he gave to his oven: 'It is called a perpetual 
oven because the operation of baking may be continued for any length of time.' 
It was indirectly heated. An endless belt a yard wide and made of a loose wire 
2I John Naylor, RritiBh Patent 1656, 29 July 1783. 'An oven for making bread ... placed upon or 
hung over a kitchen fire ... may be tumt-'<l around while the bread ... contained in it remains in a 
fixf'..d position ... which I called Rotative Oven.' 
22 
I. F. Rolland, Four de boulangerie, French Patent 7015, 8 Apr. 1851. Description de brtmefs d'irwen­
tions, vol. 23, p.l76. 
23 
British Patent No. 3337, 15 May 1810. 
176 