bags with germs to empty ... : "' Another appliance, the Water Witeh, hav­
ing light, 'ahnost entirely alnminnm hnilt suction pnmps by means of a water 
wheel' can 'he set temporarily in the kitchen sink or bath tnh' (fig. 418). The 
sucked-up dust is drawn through the tube and directly carried away by the 
150 
water. Enticing accessories are delivered with it: a massage vibrator outfit, 
or hair-drying apparatus. 'The heaviest head of hair is quickly and thoroughly 
dried after washing! 
All this suggests that the way was not clear. But promoters of water-driven 
cleaners held the wrong cards. Only one way held the true promise of the future: 
the use of the fraction horsepower electric motor. When in 1909, only a year 
after granting of the basic patent, the Hoover Company countered with a full­
page advertisement in the Saturday Evening Post (fig. 420), it seemed to he 
deliberately trumping the Water Witch's claims; 'The motor will outlast the 
house you live in.' But the distinctive motto was: 'Sweep with electricity for 
3 cents a week.' In spite of the haughty boast, 'We are now turning out hun­
dreds of machines a week, the demand is enormous,' the unmher of rival attempts, 
a few of which we have mentioned, shows that the success was uot unmitigated. 
But the path was the right one - electric drive. 
The two basic types, that of 1859 and that of 1860, are represented ahnost 
equally in the electrified portable models of today. The pure suction type of 
151 
1859 survives in the 'tank' type, where the operator still holds only the suc­
tion nozzle, as in the earlier, fixed vacuum installations; the motor and dust­
containing unit are drawn behind on a sliding chassis. The 'handle type,' in 
which the rotary brushes, the motor, suction intake, dust hag, and handle all 
form a light trolley-unit, follows the type of 1860: suction comhined with brush­
ing action. 
These easily portable vacuums give extraordinary opportunity to high-pressure 
salesmanship. Visiting with his machine from door to door, the salesman sold 
mainly on the pay-as-you-go tern1s by which American mass production­
from the vacuum cleaner to the automobile and the house- became financially 
possihle. The mail-order houses, founded in the 'seventies, also owe their tre­
mendous growth in the time of full mechanization to this credit system. 
Modern pay-as-you-go enterprise, according to Tom J. Smith, began with 
the photographic portraiture of deceased relatives. The gold-framed enlarge­
ments of the departed were delivered on an easel and, for an investment of $25, 
ug 'The Hydraulic' Catalogue, CoUeclion Tom J. Smith, Jr. 
lW Vacuum Hydro Company, New York, Catalogue, Collection Tom J. Smith, Jr. 
m As in the Electrolux. 
594 