mechanism to push off the pared fruit. But replacing the hand, a rotating 
64 
carrier mechanically pushes the apples onto the fork. 
The apple-paring machine was never introduced in Europe. Even in America 
its life span falls within the nineteenth century, when fruit trees clustered around 
every farm. As soon as fruit growing became a specialized industry, with trees 
in tens of thousands of the same variety, the devices were relegated to the attic. 
Even in 1945 the old trees may continue to bear when it pays no one to gather 
their fruit. 
The mechanization of chopping or mincing might be traced in like manner. 
Diverse rr.teans were found to ensure continuous Up-and-down movement of 
the knife. Machines for mincing meat or chopping vegetables had devices to 
rotate the foodstuff constantly beneath the blade's regnlar guillotine action. 
The Patent Office files egg beaters in the same category as other rotating or 
oscillating mechanisms, such as cement mixers, kneading machines, or butter 
makers. Mechanization of the butter churn was accomplished in a variety of 
ways after 1850. A few of the proposals for 'breaking up and mixing together 
the yolks and whites of eggs' may show in what roundabout way (figs. 382, 383), 
the egg beater reached its final form. The mechanical prototype of the egg 
beater is the drill. Indeed the beater's principle is that of 'boring into' a liquid. 
65 
Its drive was accordingly patterned on that of the drill (fig. 381). In the early 
'seventies it was given its now standard drive by two geared wheels (fig. 384). 
The 'sixties took the same lively interest in the smaller hand tools as in the 
major cleaning appliances. These light appliances reached their standard form 
within the period, while the heavier ones were shelved, having to await the advent 
of the electric power unit. 
The Light Power Unit 
The small electric motor, ranging from the size of a billiard ball to that of a 
football, can be inconspicuously built in and moved wherever needed. While 
demanding very little care and upkeep, it is the most adaptable of prime movers. 
It meant to the mechanization of the household what the invention of the wheel 
meant to moving loads. It set everything rolling. Without it, mechanical com­
fort in the house could have advanced little beyond its condition in the 'sixties. 
From mid-century on, labor-saving tools were designed with a surprisingly 
sure hand. As we have seen, the principles of the v acuurn cleaner, of the dish­
washer, of the washing machine, were dismvered ahnost instantaneously. But 
their success and assin1ilation had to await the mechanical mover. 
64 
U.S. Patent 1,455,997, 20 Feb. 1923. 
66 
U.S. Patent 28,047, I May 1860. 
556 