ROCAILLE 
With the certainty and sureness of accumulated experience, seemingly impro足
vised shapes are instilled with that unique fusion of discipline and flexihility 
which runs through the operas of Mozart. 
For this union of discipline with flexibility, wherein objects are formed as if 
eternally in flux, the late Baroque invented a symbol in which all these qualities 
are gathered: the Rocaille. 
The shell-form, with which a boneless organism surrounds itself and in which 
are joined the eternity of stone and the flux of living waters, seems as if 
created to express the will of this late period. The early phases, dating back to 
the Renaissance, are well known. Now a radical transformation takes place. 
The shell is transmuted to seaweed, lace, or other forrns. It swells, becomes 
membrane-like, is broken up, or indentated, until the naturalistic form is 
changed into a sign or, as the modern painters say, transformed into an object. 
These signs appear singly or strung in C or S shapes, eontrasting with or sup足
porting other elements. Here fantasy freely plays amid the flexibility, fmesse, 
and generosity of this late period. 
The search for comprehensiveness appears everywhere, using the curve to em足
brace individual parts; in urbanism, in the layout and interrelation of squares 
and places, in the rounded eorners of the interiors. This unique meeting of 
reason with the richness of organic form is nowhere more marked. than in 
furniture, always so difficult of development. In furniture it is as if tbe store 
of experience accumulated since the late Gothic were suddenly bursting forth: 
the curved eommodes, the mobile cylinder tops of the desks, and the finely 
modeled sitting or reclining furniture. 
Just as the shell becomes an object infused with the most varied organic forms, 
so the legs of Rococo furniture approach the structure of the bough (fig. 170). 
Obedience to the lines of force of the wood gives it a natural similarity to the 
skeleton of the branch, whose softer parts the water has rotted away. The 
careers of the great naturalists (Bnfl'on, Linnaeus) run parallel with the lifetime 
of Lonis XVI. The generation that created the Rococo and sitting comfort 
probed more deeply than any before it the life of plants and animals. 
The form-giving energy of this period may perhaps be measured in comparison 
to our own time, with our storehouse of new materials, and our inability to give 
them life. Had our age brought to human purposes a fraction of the inventive足
ness of the late Baroque, where might we stand today? 
THE MODELING OF THE CHAIR 
The Rocoeo tackled its seating forms in the most radical way. Little more 
312 