To ant.ieipate lhe amnvcr: in a resilient mode of sr.ating, by interplay of the 
body and the chair mechanism. 
We do not know of any research into the effect on tbe blood stream of small 
shifts in posture, minor changes of equilibrium. That they somehow influence 
relaxation and may often take the place of upholstery is suggested by the rock­
ing chair, never so thoroughly developed as in America during the late eigh­
teenth century (fig. 235). 
The rocking chair owes its comfort to nicety of fashioning. It derives from 
the Windsor type. I 1.s slender hickory spindles, well suited to cmdle the spine, 
and its curved saddle seat rellect the quality of colonial life: medieval austerity 
tempered hy sensitive workmanship. The rocking chair, like clapboard, is one 
of the constants of American life. The American farmer, at the end of the day, 
will instinctively move to the rocker on his porch. The European peasant sits 
immovahle through the twilight as if nailed to the bench before his cottage. 
These simple differences must be understood, for more profoundly than one 
might think, they change the course of inventive fantasy. They underlie the 
divergence of American and European comfort in the nineteenth century. As 
soon as mechanization became a decisive power in furniture, these differences 
began to show. 
How is this resilient mode of sitting achieved? 
In 1353 - the time of experimentation with movahle railroad seats- the 
first chair of this type appears. lt. solves at first blow the prohlem of seating 
made resilient by a knitting together of the mechanism and the sitter's body. 
It will later be refined and elaborated, but its basic principle will remain 
unchanged. 
The crossing of two types, fertilized by a potent mechanical fantasy, yields a 
new and improved variety. What Americans were later to perform so well in the 
hybridization of plants appears here in the mechanical domain. The two types 
to be combined are the rocking chair and the revolving chair (figs. 235, 236, 237, 
238). But now the rotary motion of the revolving chair is combined with the 
oscillating motion of the rocking chair. This is where inventive fantasy comes 
in. The body of the rocking chair is raised and mounted on a hase. Everything 
else is a matter of mechanics. 
In the early 'thirties, Americans attempted to make the rocking chair more 
resilient by placing wagon springs between the rockers and the seat (fig. 236). 
6 
The handwritten letter patent of 1831 tem1s it 'health vehicle ... a combina-
e US. Patent, 23 Apr. 1831. 
401 