For the eye and the ear, doors to the emotions, media of mechanical reproduc­
tion were invented. The cinema, with its unlimited possibility of reproducing 
an optical-psychic process, displaces the theater. The eye accommodates itself 
to two-dimensional representation. The adding of sound and of color aims at 
an increasing realism. New values are horn with the new medium, and a new 
mode of imagination. Unfortunately, the demand for mass production caused 
the medium to he used along the path of least resistance, to the debasement of 
public taste. 
For the reproduction of sound t)lrougb space even greater potentialities were 
opened. More than any other medium, the radio aeeeded to power in the time 
of fnll mechanization, influencing every aspect of life. Now music is mechanized 
in its fnll tonal range. The phonograph, originating in the eighteenth century, 
was but a forerunner of this mechanization. Its refinement occurred parallel 
to the introduction of the radio. As sound was added to the moving picture, 
so sight was added to radio- television. 
To close the circle, transportation breaks into intimate living. Transportation 
was one of the favorite objects of nineteenth-century mechanization. But the 
locomotive is a neutral vehicle. The automobile is a personal appurtenance 
which comes to he understood as a movable part of the household: one the Ameri­
can is least willing to give up. With the exaggeration permitted to a moral 
critic, John Steinbeck remarks, in 1944, that most of the children 'were con­
ceived in Model-T Fords and not a few were horn in them. The theory of the 
16 
Anglo-Saxon home became so warped that it never quite recovered.' 
At all events, the highway network was adapted to the automobile in the 
decades between the World Wars. The automobile is a harbinger of full mechan­
ization. Its mass production began in the second decade, but took decisive 
effect only at the beginning of full mechanization. First concrete highways, 
later parkways, made crnising so effortless that one is led to drive for driving's 
sake, to overcome one's inner restlessness, or to escape from oneself by depress­
ing the gas pedal. This trend can he observed everywhere, but nowhere so 
strongly as in America. In the land where in the 1840's Henry Thoreau pro­
foundly but unsentimentally described the life of the tramper, based on the 
close contact of man with nature, the automobile has ahnost crowded out the 
pedestrian. Walking, relaxation for its own sake, because the body demands 
it, or because the brain requires a pause in which to recuperate, is increasingly 
eliminated hy the motor-car. 
To investigate the sociological implications of the automobile or the psychic 
16 John Steinbeck, Cannery Row, New York, 1944. 
43 