severs the mass into pieces, each the weight of a loaf. A second machine rounds 
these into halls, as the haker formerly did hy hand. This encourages a thin 
skin to form around the pieces of dough to prevent the gas from escaping, or, as 
bakers say, to prevent 'bleeding.' The halls of dough fall each into its hollow 
on the hucket proofer, an endless chain, and glide for a quarter of an hour through 
warm glassed-in chambers, where they are sheltered against any draft. 
The final preparation of the dough takes place in a molder which, mechanically 
imitating and breaking down the last movements of the hand-haker, rolls the 
halls into cylindrical shape. Now they are ready to he laid into the pan, an 
operation that can he automatically performed hut which even large plants 
prefer to do by hand. Fermentation is again stimulated. In pan-proofing cab­
inets with high humidity, the yeast works vigorously and in the course of an 
hour drives the dough over the top of its pan. 
Now the haking process begins. The pans disappear into the 10-foot-wide 
slot of the white-walled ovens, standing side by side. For half an hour they 
travel on their endless helt through the 130-foot tunnel. Fully haked, they 
are automatically pushed out at the other end. A second time the human hand 
intervenes, and heavily gloved workers pluck the loaves from the hot pans. A 
conveyor moves them to the floor below where, in about two hours, they slowly 
cool in overhead coolers -moving racks in chambers with exact control of 
temperature and humidity. 
Methods appear in the 'thirties hy which the cooling time is reduced hy divi­
sion into two stages: 'The first step at atmospheric pressure, and thereafter 
quicker cooling of the hread hy evaporation of moisture under sahatmospheric 
69 
pressure.' 
There remains only to slice the loaves, to pack and distribute them. 
The automatic slicing machines, which cut sixty loaves a minute into uniform 
slices, are late comers in bread manufacture. Invented in 1928, hesitantly 
70 
accepted in 1930, by 1940 they were regarded as indispensahle. When in 1942 
the United States Goverrunent, heing at war, hanned the use of bread-slicing 
machines to save steel, this so displeased the housewives that the order had to 
be canceled. 
The idea of cutting a whole loaf of hread at once, we may note, had appeared 
in America as early as the 'sixties, when a bread-cutting device with ten parallel 
6
s U.S. Patent 2,012,772, 19 Nov, 1935. AI; we shall see presently (cf. 'Changes in Structure'), this 
process was further extended to inject into the bread any desired aroma or color. 
7
n 'When slicing bread was first suggested ... the bakers felt slicing would impair the quality and 
appearance of their loaves,' E. J. Frederick, 'Slicing latest development,' Canadian Baker 4 Confectioner, 
Toronto, July, 1938. 
194 