has descended from her gilt frame into the confortable amid exuberant cushions 
and drapery. Prowling around her nakedness are the head and paws of the lion 
from the Belfort War Memorial. What the ending may he is suggested by the 
amputated hand that hangs from a lion's jaws instead of a tassel (fig. 222). 
The phantasmagoria of the upholsterer is stamped everywhere. Andre Breton 
conveys this in his manner at the close of his introduction to La Femme 100 
Tetes (1929). 
The woman with 100 no-heads will become the picture book par excellence of Lhls time, 
when it will appear more and more clearly that each salon is bottomed in a lake, and it 
deservedly should be streB:'ed with its scaly lights, its astral gilt, its weed dances, its floor 
of mud, its toiletary scintillations. 
Of the billowing drapes, of the murky atmosphere, Ernst's scissors make a 
104 
submarine cave (fig. 199). Are these living creatures, plaster statues or 
models of the academic brush found reclining here, or rotting? To this question 
no answer can or should he given. The room, as nearly always, is oppressive 
with assassination and non-escape. 
Night shrieks in her lair and advances upon our eyes like quick flesh. 
Such is the demonic side of nineteenth century, ever scented behind the banal 
forms. Here it has been overcome and, at a safe distance, may be evoked through 
the Dadaistic collage. The pathos of a decadent society that has made its house 
an operatic setting is not to be taken in earnest. BuL what the Surrealists mock­
ingly portray is at bottom the same phenomenon that Henrik Ibsen, living 
within the period, attacked in deadly earnest and incarnated in his personages 
-the ceaseless roaming in search of one's soul: Nora's longing to escape from 
her domestic prison, the millstream debacle in Rosmersholm, Oswald's madness 
in Glwsts. There, as here, it is the nineLeenth century, never finding the way 
to its true self, devaluating symbols without shaping new ones. 
04 
1 Man Ray, at a later Surrealist Exhihit.ion, Paris, 1935. showed in natura a 'Taxi Pluvieux' (Rainy 
Taxi), a cab in which lifesize manikins are seated; onto them. water trickles from the moss-hung roof. 
Salvador Dali, who set the Surr~::alist stage for the public audience, placed this 'Taxi Pluvieux' in his 
dark Pavilion of Venus, next to his aquarium, in which, through glass windows one watched live merN 
maids swimming under water with inflated rubber tails, New York World's Fair, 1939. 
388 