Charlemagne was found seated on a Roman throne of marble when the 
emperor's tomb was opened in Aachen Cathedral. And how strikingly primitive, 
9 
even four centuries later, is the bishop's throne at. Go~lar," with it.s seat. of thick 
stone slabs: a coffer of stone that even the delicate woven work of its bronze 
superstructure cannot alleviate. The problem of differentiated furniture seems 
to have been quite foreign to the Romanesque centuries." 
Flanders and the Creation of Intimate Surroundings 
The most favorable ground for the rise of stable furniture was in Flanders. 
Under Burgundian rule, Flanders had prudently siDod aloof from the hundred­
year feud between England and France, and had adopted a policy of good will 
toward the English. In industry and prosperity Flanders was a half-century 
ahead of any of her neighbors. Here the finest woolens were woven. From here 
came the Arras tapestry shot with gold or silver thread, the pride of the Dukes 
of Burgundy, who preserved them in special warehouses. The pictorial tapestry 
was loosely hung in the apartments of the great lords, and traveled as ducal 
presents to the courts of the Pope and of Europe. No later tapestry has equaled 
its power; its surene""s of the use of material. The union of fertile Burgundy with 
industrial Brahant and Flanders lasted over a century and ended with the fall 
of Burgundy. The collapse of this productive state- a huffcr between hostile 
France and Germany - proved nefarious for the later history of the Continent. 
But in the hundred years during which Flanders stood joined to Burgundy, a 
prolific culture sprang up, hothouse-like, around the two capitals, Dijon and 
Brussels: the softly draped Burgundian sculpture of the fifteenth century; the 
art of painting at the court of Dijon; and lastly, inventions closely linked to 
artistic expression - the oil painting of the brothers van Eyck; and the new 
luxury furniture that for the first time made use of late Gothic frame construc­
tion to create a secular comfort. 
The earliest ornamental piece of the secular household, the dresser, it has 
been pointed out, first appears in one of the most beautiful of miniatures, the 
fi9 Ill. in Falke and Schmitz, op.cit. 
60 
There is much uncertainty about the age of the low three-pegged stool. At any rate it must have 
been well suited to the uneven Rornanesque floors. The type survives to this day as the milking stool. 
The tbree~pJg stool is seen in miniatures and in fifteenth-century woodcuts before the four-leggad chair 
was revived. In sixteenth-century England it takes the shape of a three-legged chait fonned of three 
round posts, one of which is extended to fonn the back. It was also made into an armchair. A three­
legged armchair from Savoy, with nearly semkireular seat, is illustrated in Falke and Schmitz, op.cit. 
fi~. 140b. 
297 