penko's early sculpture with its hollowed forms, and of Cuhism at its peak. 
Yet the question of influence is overshadowed not only hy the masterful render­
ing, hut by the more universal issue: What attempts are made from other sides 
to solve Marcel Duchamp's problem? What do the scientists have to say about 
it? Looked at it in this way, Duchamp's problem appears deeply interfused 
with the period. How early the physiologists showed interest in these problems, 
we have already seen. In his r,elehrated studies of the 'seventies on the motions 
of men and animals, Eadweard Muybridge set up a series of thirty cameras at 
twelve-inch intervals, releasing their shutters electromagnetically as soon as 
the moving object passed before the plate. Muyhridge attempted- and from 
several sides simultaneously - to record the phases of simple movements such 
as rising, sitting, and walking downstairs. He thereby obtained a sequence of 
motion phases. Each picture showed the object in an isolated phase as arrested 
by each camera (fig. 16). 
Etienne Jules Marcy came closer to reconstructing the path of a movement 
from its phases. He used hut a single camera and, in his research of greatest 
interest today, a single plate. At the beginning his movers wore white garments 
against a black hackgrmmd. But this resulted in an overlapping series. He 
therefore clad his model in hlack, with a bright metal strip extending along the 
feet and up the torso and arms. This gave a coherent motion sequence in which 
the forms no longer obliterated one another" (figs. 13-14). A half century 
later H. E. Edgerton invented the stroboscope, whose highly perfected technical 
equipment (radio interrupter) could freeze motion to the millionth part of a 
second. The problem was conceived by both Marcy and Edgerton along lines 
that are methodologically similar. 
Although Marcel Duchamp's 'Nude descending the staircase' created a sen­
sation when exhibited at the New York Armory Show of 1913, it lay beyond 
the public's comprehension- a failure of understanding not limited to one 
place or one country. It is not enough to say that the American puhlic was 
here making its first acquaintance of the new trends. The reason must be traced 
to the deeply ingrown fallacy that problems of feeling have nothing to do with 
problems of science, notwithstanding the fact that every true culture has taken 
it for granted that thinking and feeling are interdependent. 
Movement in Its Own Right, c.l920 
In the second phase the pure form of movement becomes an artistic object in 
its own right. It does not have to reproduce naturalistically an outside object. 
&{;E. J. Marey, La Methode graphique dans les sciences experimentales, with appendix: 'DCveloppement 
de la methode graphique par l'emploi de la photographie,' Paris, 1885, p.34. 
107 