mechanization. As they arose the mechanical aids found a ready place within 
the science of housekeeping. 
Organization of the work process emerged toward the end of the 'sixties. 
Organization of the Work Process, 1869 
Catherine E. Beecher had grasped the essentials of the trend (1369): 'The 
cook's galley in the steamship has every article and utensil used in cooking for 
200 persons in a space ... so arranged that with one or two steps the cook can 
12 
reach all he uses.' 
When the modern architects in their turn recognized the importance of the 
vvell-planned kitchen after 1920, they took the dining-car galley as a prototype; 
hut this did not exist .when Catherine Beecher wrote her book. As we have seen, 
George Pullman applied for a patent covering his rudimentary dining car in 
tbe same year, 1869. 
'In contrast to this,' she continues, 'the cooking materials and utensils, the 
sink and the eating room are at such distances apart that half the time and 
strength is employed in walking back and forth to collect and return the articles 
13 
used.' How to her mind the organization of the work process might be tackled, 
she shows in carefal drawings and descriptions (figs. 336, 338). 
The large table and the isolated dresser, one first notices, have disappeared 
from her kitchen. Instead of the table, more compact working surfaces extend 
beneath the windows. Instead of the dresser, there are shelves, drawers, and 
receptacles beneath the working surfaces. 
In the mechanized kitchen of today, three working centers are acknowledged 
(fig. 337): storage and preservation; cleaning and preparation; cooking and 
serving. Two of these centers, preservation-storage and cooking-serving were 
clearly distinguished by Catherine Beecher in 1869, and treated as units. The 
cooking range, however, still had to stand apart within a protective wne. 
At the same time she brings together the implement and its working place. 
Her working surfaces are well lighted and no larger than necessary. On the 
left the cover of the large flour bin stands flush with the working surface, con­
tinuous with it at waist-height. The housewife has only to raise the lid and 
sprinkle flour on the adjacent 'board for molding bread.' We are still in the 
time when the American housewife - as against the European- baken her 
bread at horne. 'The true housewife,' Catherine Beecher says elsewhere, 'makes 
14 
her bread the sovereign of the kitchen.' Understandably, then, drawers for 
u Beecher and Stowe, op.cit. p.33. 
u Ibid. 
u Ibid. p.35. 
5I8 