late 'fifties into the 'seventies. As we shall see, this also applies to other spheres 
of activity in the United States of the period. 
Agriculture in Full Mechanization 
Phase hy phase the operations of the hand were replaced hy mechanisms. 
But the succession of processes remained what it had been in handicraft methods: 
reaping and binding the sheaves. 
In 1880, it is estimated, 20 man-hours were needed to harvest an acre of wheat­
land. Between 1909 and 1916, this number was reduced to 12.7 man-hours, 
and between 1917 and 1921- that is, with the advent of full mechanization­
to 10.7 hours. The following decade cut the figure to 6.1 (1934rl>)," that is, to 
almost the same extent as in the four decades preceding. 
The Tractor 
This leap in productivity was brought about from the outside: one mobile 
power, the small electric motor, made possible the mechanization of the house­
hold; another mobile power, the internal combustion motor, made possible the 
full mechanization of agriculture. Aroun<l1905 the first tractors appear. They 
are monsters, like the electric ranges of the time. The tractor was made possible 
hy the cheaper production of the automohile. But how cautiously it was 
broached. Even in 1915, when in December of that year the International 
Harvester Company (McCormick) put out the first issue of Tractor, the unique­
ness of the periodical was stressed as 'the fust puhlication devoted exclusively 
to tractor-farming.' Such questions are raised as: 'Is it difficult to operate a 
small farm tractor?' 'Will it pay to huy a tractor now?' The tractor is con­
trasted with the horse. 'This power does not eat a cent when idle.' And finally, 
to rouse the farmer's imagination, a tractor and an airplane are shown side hy 
side with the comment: 'This butterfly and this ant are sisters under the skin.' 
It was the time when Henry Ford had attained the output of a million automo­
biles yearly. Within a few years came the great leap in the tractor's popularity. 
From 80,000 in the year 1918, the number was donbled to 160,000 in the follow­
ing year, rising to 1.6 millions by 1939. A tenfold increase had occurred in the 
time of full mechanization (1919-39). 
The progression from the clUillb-y locomobile, which the English applied to 
their steam plows in the 'sixties and 'seventies, to the larger aud, eventually, 
lighter tractors, reflects the normal phases of mechanization. The popular 
instrument for the ordinary farmer is the light all-purpose tractor. Instead of 
GS Technology on the Farm, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1940. p.63. 
162 