larger.' Such are Charles Dickens' impressions on first acquaintance with the 
American railroads in 1342. And somewhat dryly he comments on the sparing 
70 
allotment of windows: 'There is a great deal of wall.' Even in the late 'fifties, 
the French noticed with surprise: 'II n'y a pas sur les chemins de fer americains, 
71 
cornme en France et comme en Angleterre, differentes categories de places . ... • 
With Pulhnan's introduction of the palace-car Pioneer, the situation changed. 
For the rapidly increasing well-to-do, a special class was created in America, 
and in the course of time it came to be identified with the name 'Pulhnan.' Like 
Napoleon III, but with greater comfort, American industrialists were to have 
their private coaches that compressed into one car the luxury for which 
Napoleon III needed a whole train. 
Precursors of the Sleeping Car (1836-65) 
The problem of the sleeping car is foreshadowed in the ship's cabin. As con­
veyances, both ship and train command a very restricted space. Yet railroad 
cars must be even more parsimonious with their space than must the larger 
ships. This immediately poses the problem overshadowing all others: economy 
of space, how to secure adequate comfort for the traveler without pre-empting 
extra space. 
It is not possible to construct for everyone an apartment like that of 
Napoleon III. It is not possible to put on wheels a bedroom with fixed beds, a 
reception room, a dining room, and an open veranda. N evertbeless, in America 
from 1365 to the year of the first vestibule train, 1336, the train became more 
and more a traveling hotel. Only one item of the imperial train bad to be fore­
gone: the bedroom with fixed beds. 
A car now had several functions to fulfil: It must be convertible - living 
quarters by day and sleeping quarters by night. Even the dining cars at first 
turned into sleeping cars at night, being called 'hotel cars.' The beds, in which 
the travelers enjoyed as much comfort as Napoleon in his, bad to disappear at 
daytime. Hence the problem of the sleeping car focuses around its convertibility: 
how to dissect the seat into elements that a couple of motions- twisting, pull­
ing, or unfolding- will recombine into a bed. 
In 1336, improvised bunks bad been in use on the Cumberland Valley Rail­
road. In the 'fifties, up to five berths were stecked in tiers and side by side. But 
once the railroad seat is considered as a couch, the whole problem of the sleep­
ing car falls into place and becomes part of the long line of patent furniture: the 
convertible seat and the folding bed. In the 'fifties, patents were not taken out 
7
° Charles Dickens, American Notes for General Circulation, ch. iv. 
n L' Illustration, vol. XXXI, p.215 (3 Apr. 1858). 
458 