Around 1920 France ranked as a land altogether bogged in routine in every­
thing pertaining to the house. The extent of the void may he measured hy the 
24 
Paris Exposition Internationale des Arts Decoratifs of 1925. The only display 
that has not fallen through the historical sieve was the Pavilion de !'Esprit 
Nouveau, erected by LeCorbusier and Pierre Jeanneret. It was relegated to 
the outskirts of the exhibit,ion and, as LeCorhusier himself remarked, 'it was 
the poorest and the most hidden away.' At the Parisian International Exposi­
tion of 1367, Edouard Manet had to build a plank hut outside the grounds in 
order to show his outlawed canvases. One thing was common to both cases: 
the authorities were ashamed of their artists. 
The Pavilion de !'Esprit Nouveau of 1925 was not merely LeCorhusier's 
protest: 'Nons ne croyons pas a !'art decoratif' (We do not believe in interior 
decoration). The Pavilion showed what was ready to take the decorator's place. 
Its LTeators had a surfeit of problems to set before the public, but little space to 
display them. The Pavilion was to fulfil the spirited writing of the review 
L'Esprit Nouveau, put out by Ozenf'ant and LeCorbusier in collaboration with 
Paul Dermee from 1920 to 1925. It was to speak for the new dwellings with their 
plan libre, for the new painting and the new urbanism. It was designed as a 
two-story cell of the large apartment houses that LeCorbusier had planned for 
Paris. How these hoUbes would stand in the city as a whole was shown by a 
great diorama of Paris, the Plan Voisin. 
24 Numerous publications and periodicals served to spread the influence of French interior decoration 
effectively among the greater public in France as well as in America-·· e.g. the Larousse, Arts d&oraiifs 
modernes, France, par Gaston Quenioux, InspL'Cteur G€m&ral de l'Enseignement de Dessein, Paris, 1925. 
The American furniture industry was strongly affected by these publications, and behind most of the 
bloated and streamlined objcct.s of the 'thirties there lurks the Paris Exhibition of 1925. 
322. American Kangaroo Sofa, Virginia, 1830's. The Psyche or .T<angaroc 
possesses unconventional curves to conform with the relaxing body. (Courtesy 
498 
Doubleday and Co.) 