types? The lock that Yale's father invented was also a pin-tumbler cylinder 
lock, with its tumblers divided into two sections, with its revolving inner cylinder 
and its fixed outer cylinder, with its springs driving on the tumblers. Over two 
decades elapsed before the elements that Yale's father had used in his door lock 
found their final shape in the lock of the younger Yale. The facts at our disposal 
may suggest the broad outlines of this process. 
In the 'fifties, the younger Yale was wholly absorbed in the problem of the 
burglarproof hank lock, unsolved at the time. Each of his bank locks was suc­
cessfully received, but be was not satisfied until he had reached a solution that 
he himself recognized as reliable. As we have seen, this was the combination 
lock with no keyhole at aiL 
Every day as he handles the heavy key to his workshop door, he wonders if 
it cannot be made more simple and convenient. Is it not ridiculous? -- the key 
that opens his 'Magic Bank Lock' is scarcely as large as the key that winds the 
mantelpiece clock. Something is wrong if an ordinary house door calls for so 
clumsy an implement, while the foot-thick door of a safe can be opened with a 
key small enough to fit one's waistcoat pocket. 
Strange as it may seem, it is easier to conceive intricate bank locks, when this 
invention is in the air, than it is to resolve a problem like that of the door lock, 
which had been at a standstill for centuries. 
Could one progress no further along the way of his father? Pin tumblers were 
usable; hut when set in this way, they were not reliable in operation. What 
good was a complicated, radial array of tumblers on a simple house door? What 
is adequate for the heavy door of a safe is not necessarily suitable for household 
use. And worse, the tumblers as arranged lay radially behind the keyhole, 
within range of sight and touch, to the delight of any tamperer. It was an easy 
matter to insert a tool and probe until one reached the right spot. A new door 
lock had to be more burglar resistant than the old, or it would be useless. In 
his bank lock, the younger Yale pushed the mechanism far back inside, beyond 
the picker's reach. He wished to follow this principle in his door lock as well, 
but complicated mechanisms were out of the question. A different approach was 
needed. 
the key for shooting the bolt, as in the old door 
His father's idea not to use 
locks, met his need. The younger Yale tried in turn to confine the function of 
the key to aligning the tumblers so that a rotation could take place. But how 
to stack the pin tumblers simply, in depth, so as to make it even more difficult 
for the picker? No archaeological research was necessary for this purpose. It 
would have led him nowhere, for to this day we do not know much about the 
Egyptian lock which, as reputation has it, inspired Yale. 
75 