than the skeletons of the seventeenth-century types is retained. They are thor­
oughly compounded. Tbe curve intervenes. Often the original types are barely 
recognizable after their transfonnation. As its lines become fluid, the chair can 
adapt itself to the organic, to the body. The seventeenth-century armrests and 
upholstered seat are relaxed and fused into a continuous curve, a shell molded 
to the body. This is around 1725. The new form of chair, whose names and 
varieties are listed in numerous handbooks of the subject, was called bergere. 
One of tile bergere types owes its name and shape to the gondola: the bergere 
en gondole. This wavy type with its semi-high hack fully corresponds to the need 
of the century. In it, as the cabinetmaker Roubo points out, the occupant can 
'rest his shoulder against the chairback while leaving the head entirely free to 
avoid disarranging the hair either of the ladies or the gentlemen.' One could 
hardly do more to accommodate a passing fashion. 
Fashion merely supplied tbe impulse for something that far transcended 
fashion: adaptability of the chair to the human body. The curve, the three­
dimensional curve, here appears, as in tile late Baroque church vaults. It was 
intrinsically suitable to the human body. Under Louis XVI the form will be 
rationalized and simplified, but the gondola type will remain (fig. 168). lt is 
noteworthy how often the semi-high backed chairs of Louis XVI will reappear 
in the fashion magazines of the Empire. It was in the shape of a bergere en 
gondole that a French upholsterer of the 1830's launched the first spiral spring 
fauteuils, producing their contour by means of a curved iron strip. The 
outline becomes blurred, the wood disappears, hut the bergere type remains. 
For a while during the 1860's, it seemed that the upholsterer was finding a new 
foothold in this constituent type; hut it soon became clear that, in his hand, 
furniture was being camouflaged as cushions. 
The light, upholstered chairs, with or without armrests, accomplish the trans­
formation. As in Rocaille, what occurs here in the shaping of furniture is an 
approach to organic form. In abstracted form, the double-S curve of the back 
rests follows the contour of human shoulders and trunk. 
In this gondola line also belongs the two-seating marquise, which the Rococo 
develops from the settle. The marquise by Delanois, latB 1760's, shows it fully 
developed (fig. 175). The marquise may be used by one or by two persons. 
13 
In a Louis XVI engraving after Moreau le jeune, a young married couple 
harmoniously occupy this enlarged faufeuil; and in 'Le Mari confesseur,' an 
engraving of the 'nineties after Henri Fragonard (1732-1806), the lady is sitting 
13 
'J'en accepte l'heureux prfsage,' engraving of Philippe C. Tri€re after Moreau le jeune (designed 
1776). 
313 