design is apparent in the Exhibition ... it, seems to us that the art manufacturers 
30 
of the whole of Europe are thoroughly demoralized.' 
'l'he systematic trartSgression of every principle of design,' another verdict 
ran, 'an abuse of modern scientific pro1,'I'ess. Man has become a servant of the 
31 
ma'chine. ~ Herrry Cole expresses this awareness in his unassuming way: 'It 
waS from the East that the most impressive lessou was to be learned ... here 
was revealed a fresh well of art ... .' And swiftly reaching from Eastern handi­
craft to the second creative center of the Exhibition: 'I venture to submit 
whether our American cousins did not, in their reaping and other machines, 
adapted to new wanL' and infant periods of society, teach us next the most valuable 
32 
lessons.' The instinct that led Cole to grasp these two poles simultaneously, 
primitive expression on one hand and products of high mechanization on the 
other, the two wellsprings of modern art, shows him far ahead of his own time. 
Only five men made up the Exhibition's executive committe.e: first and fore­
most, Henry Cole: a great civil engineer, Robert Stephenson, who had just 
completed the tubular bridge across the Mcnai Strait; Digby Wyatt, the archi­
tect and reformer; and another Society of Arts member, noted for his reorganiza­
tion i>f the Daily News, who brought his experieuee to the catalogue. This team 
was to see through the most uucompromising task of the whole Exhibition­
a building 'adapted to new wants.' Here Henry Cole could put into practice 
what he had been preaching to the art industry: he offered to Joseph Paxton 
the opportunity of constructing a crystal palace, a great proof that in mechaniza­
3
tion too a vision lies concealed, in which 'all traces of materiality dissolve.' ·' 
Completed hy a near miracle, the project, in more timid hands, would never 
have become a reality." A pseudo-monumental building would have heen de­
creed; and, had further obstacles arisen, the whote idea would have been dropped. 
In creating a building, an exhibition, anything of artistic value, the patrons 
are nearly as important as the designer. 
So not Paxton alone was to be thanked for this building, hut the London of 
1851, whose atmosphere made it possible. Is it not strange that a short while 
later, for the New York World's Fair of 1853, Paxton designed a late-romantic 
35 
Gothic structure which fell wide of any genial solution? 
0 
~ Reprinted in the Journal of Design, vol. v (1851), p.l58. 
3
l Nic-olette Gray, 'Prophets of the Modern Movement,' Archiledural Review, London, Feb. 1937. 
n Cole, Journal of Design, vol vr, p.252. 
sa Lothar Bucher, Kulfurhisf.orische Skitten aus der Indnstrieausgfellung alh:r Voelker, Frankfurt a.M., 
1851, pp.Io-11. 
34 Henry Cole himself narrates in a few pages the exciting events that led to the building of the Crystal 
Palace. Cf. Cole, Fifty Years of Public Work, vol. r, pp.163f. 
3> IlJustrated in B. SiJliman Jr. and C. R. Goodrich, The World of &ience, Art and Industry, New York, 
1854, pp.l-3. 
352 