end of the eighteenth century. 'That variety of furniture formerly called "tahles 
a l'anglaise" were generally of mahogany. of rounded shape, but provided with 
49 
two drop leaves' so that they could be easily placed to the wall. 
Indeed, the development of large dining tables had begun in England about a 
50 
century earlier, leading to manifold solutions. In size these' English tables' were 
midway between a dining table and the long trestle tahles of the Middle Ages. 
In keeping with the capricious and discriminating society of the eighteenth 
century, fancy freely plays with new forms and novel combinations. Now a 
square table becomes circular or oval, now a circular one grows into a square, 
or an oval. 'Horseshoe tables, seven feet long, using taper legs for the exten­
51 
sion' also came into fashion. 
No less varied are the mechanisms for these transformations. The basic late­
medieval transition types, such as the drop-leaf and the draw-leaf tables, are 
amplified and technically elaborated. Around 1800 a new type of extension was 
52 
patented: 'detachable leaves carried on hinged diamond-shaped underframing.' 
This type directly points toward the American patent-furniture movement in 
the first half of the nineteenth century (fig. 165). 
Be&ides these drop-leaf and draw-leaf types, the medieval trestle table, long 
and narrow, lives on, but now is made in sections: an aligned series of small 
square tables, each resting on a turned column." 
Even the late eighteenth century prefers not to leave its tables permanently 
set up in the room. In Washington's larger dining room in Philadelphia, where 
the formal dinners were held, there was set up (1790) 'the sectional dining table 
on which the plateaus would be placed. But this room was also used for the 
Tuesday levees and for the reception of special delegations. Then the table 
54 
would be separated into its units and placed against the walls.' 
Creation of Intimate Surroundings: Differentiation into Types 
As the wanderings of furniture begin slowly to subside, the interior of the 
house grows more populated. New types arise, made for permanence and sta­
bility. Differentiation sets in. 
For the Middle Ages, every piece of furniture was either a receptacle or an 
object outside the sphere of everyday life: a throne or a choir stall. Furniture, 
49 Ibid. vol. IV, col. ll25. 
oo Macquoid and F .. dwards, op.cit. 'Table, dining table, trestle table. • 
M Cf. The Cabinet Maker's London Book of Prices, 1788, Pl. XIX, fig. 2. 
02 British Patent, no. 2396, 1 May 1800, Richard Gillow. 
53 Macquoid and Edwards, op.dt. voL III, p.212. 
M Stephen Decatur,' George Washington and His Presidential Furniture,' AmeriCan Collector, Feb.l941, 
vol. x. 
293 