Bosch (fig. 140) bears witness to the feasting and merrymaking enjoyed in the 
fifteenth-century burgher house around the tall fireplace of the kitchen. 
In the seventeenth century the kitchen ceased to be one of the main dwelling 
29 
rooms. It became solely 'a service utility.' In the nineteenth century, with 
its speculative building and ceaselessly growing city populations, the kitchen 
lost every vestige of charm. 
The Cast~Iron Range 
The fireplace runs through the centuries. The cast-iron range, heated hy 
wood or coal, prevails in the nioeteenth. The steam boiler and the iron range 
346. Cast-Iron Plate of Pennsylvania Dutch 
Stove, 17 48. From fhe stove o.f iron plnies used 
by German and Swiss colonists the basic heat 
source of nineleenfh-ceniury America was lo 
deuelop. This plale is irwcribed: W B [William 
Bransen]; K T F [Koven Tree (Coventry) Fur­
nace]; Cotes Brynlein hat Waser die Pyle [God's 
Well has Water in Plenty]. (Courtesy Landis 
Valley Museum, Lancaster County, Pa.) 
are as characteristic of the nineteenth century as hydraulic power and electricity 
are of ours. No country produced iron stoves and ranges in such profuse variety 
as America. The English observers note this, from Charles Dickens's comment 
on 'red-hot monsters' in the 'forties to Oscar Wilde's complaint some four 
decades later against heat-radiating decorations often seen in the center of the 
room. The cast-iron stove and range were identified with America much as 
the automobile was later. From America the most diverse models reached the 
Continent and even England. But the tile range with its even store of heat 
was still favored in the European kitchen, despite the fact that specialists were 
required to build it tile by tile. Catherine Beecher, if not on the esthetic grounds 
of the English observers, voiced practical objections to the cast-iron range, 
which in the 'sixties was already supreme. 'We cannot but regret that our old 
29 Havard, Didionnaire de l'ameublemenl el de la decoration depuis le Xllle siCcle jusqu'O. nos jours, 
vol. I, col. 1133. 
528 