456. Beginnings of Gymnastic Apparatus in the Early Nineteenth Century. (P. H. Clias, Anfangs­
gruende der Gymnastik oder Turnkunst, Bern, 1886) 
The next generation took a bolder step. Philanthropin had grown up within 
the hot-house atmosphere of princely patronage. Its exercises preserved the 
charm and also the luxury of courtly accomplishments. Johann Heinrich Pesta­
lozzi (1746-1827), who belonged to this next generation, worked in more ans­
tere surroundings. The Swiss patricians who ruled his country were less open 
to innovation than the prince of Anhalt-Dessau. They would lend no ear to 
his proposals. Pestalozzi labored alone. He too was influenced by Rousseau's 
Emile, stimulator of pedagogical ideas in this period. Pestalozzi, the city dweller, 
a citizen of Zurich, having studied jurisprudence and theology, apprenticed 
himself to a farmer to learn the art of tilling the soil. For in the peasant, as 
against the townsman, he saw the 'power of nature more vital and alive' (noch 
belebtere Naturkraft). But his own ventures as a farmer ended in misfortune. 
He lost his own money and his friends' too. He gathered abandoned, homeless, 
or ill-treated children on his farm. Thns 'Neuhof' was no sojourn for the educa­
tion of nobles or patricians; it became a poor-house that had to support itself 
hy work in the fields in summertime, by spinning and weaving in winter. The 
year 1780 saw its bankruptcy and disbanding. But from this disappointing 
ventnre Pestalozzi had gained the experience from which nineteenth-century 
pedagogics were to emerge. His best years remained workless until patrician 
rule was overthrown (1798) and an opportunity to realize his pedagogical ideas 
at last came into sight. 'I could have spat in the face of the whole world.' Thus 
Pestalozzi summarizes the experience of his manhood years. In his new locale, 
Burgdorf, he introduced his free exercises, that is, exercises requiring no equip­
39 
ment (fig. 455). Care of the body was for him, as for Basedow, the counter­
part to spiritual activity. It was a coming into agreement with 'nature,' not 
9 
8 Pestalozzi's article 'Ueber Koerperbildung als Einleitung auf den Versucb einer Elementar Gym­
nastik,' in Wochenschrijtjaer Menschenbildung, Aara.u, 1807, affords insight into his guiding principles. 