of the full Victorian era. Henry Cole (1803-82), as 'sole secretary of the depart­
ment of design,' controlled, among other things, the English drawing schools, 
the number of which by 1864 bad grown to 91. Owen Jones (1809-74), an interior 
designer of wide activity," became 'Superintendent of the Works of the Great 
Exhibition.' Richard Redgrave (1804-88), a genre painter tending to social 
implications in the later part of his career, was at the same time 'Inspector­
General for Art and Surveyor of the Crown.' 
Henry Cole was the tireless propagandist and organizer. Owen Jones was 
more active on the artistic side and became influential through his Grammar of 
OrnamRnl, which went through repeated printings down lo 1910. Richard Red­
grave was the best thinker of the circle. To follow Redgrave in his thinking, 
one must turn to his official reports and to the addresses he made when present­
47 
ing medals and prizes in the school. A rare thing it is, in the nineteenth century, 
to discover a historical source within the pages of official orations. 
No member of the circle attempted to make a final summary of its thinking. 
Its significance lies in the manifesto, in the fragment, in the unexpected ad­
vance. Presenting prizes at the Society of Art in 1850, Redgravc discusses the 
meaning of 'utility': 
Do not misunderstand me: I do not refer to that common and obvious sense of utility, 
by which we know that the use of a carpet is to cover a floor, a glass to contain a liquid ... 
which, whilst it requires more studies and thought to arrive at, is no less real, and would 
save us from many errors both of choice and taste. A carpet, whilst it covers the floor, 
is also the ground from which all the furnitm·c and the various objects in the apartment 
are to arise: it should therefore be treated as a flat surface ... but these utilities are 
violated." 
The intellectual outlook of the circle is more or less in keeping with Utilitar­
ianism as expounded in its philosophical and economic aspects by John Stuart 
Mill (1806-73). Henry Cole, moreover, early came in contact with Mill. The 
two met twice a week during the early thirties, for discussion at a friend's house. 
Only Gottfried Semper, the Gern1an architect (1803-79), attempted to mold 
the experience and principles of this London of the Great Exhibition into a 
broad system. Living in England as an emigre at the time, he worked close to 
Cole's circle, collaborated on the Great Exhihition, and hecame an instructor 
in Architecture, Metalwork, and Decorative Art at the newly founded School 
~&He also built shop fronts having windows where the binders of cast iron or bronze were left visible: 
'Shop front for Mr. Chapper in New Bond St.reet, London,' was still standing before the Second ·world 
War. Illustrared in Journal of Design, vol. VI, p.13. 
47 
The compilation of Redgrave's writings by his son is none too satisfactory, for it fails to distinguish 
the words of the author from those of the compiler. Cf. Gilbert R. Red grave, Manual of Design, com­
piled from the writings and addresses of Richard Red grave, London, 1876. 
48 
Cole quotes this speech, Journal of Design., vol. I, p.lOl. 
357 