carried the heat through the hollow walls. Wall and floor healing is not unusual 
in Homan settlements heyond the Alps. The technical scheme of the thermae 
is entirely based on this combined heating system, which distributed the he11t 
throughout the room with greater evenness than could later be attained by any 
other method. 
This heating system was used on the broad Homan scale in halls of dimensions 
hitherto unknown. Linked with its fires was another element: water. The 
aqueducts through which water came from the Alhan hills were already a cen­
tury-old institution by the Lime tlw thermae arose. Now they were multiplied. 
The enormous swimming pools of the Homan frigidaria and their lavish con~ 
sumption of water were nova in civilization. Ahundance of water and heal give 
the Homan thermae their unique stamp. What makes them impressive are 
not the quantities of water and amounts of heal they consnmed, but the way 
they served total regeneration. 
With the advent of the technified hot-air bath and its variously heated rooms 
(tepidarium, warm; calda.rium, hot; laconicum, very hot), the function of the 
fifth-century Greek bath was definitively altered. The bath proper now becomes 
paramount. The individual parts of the gymnasium are retained, and likewise 
the palestra for Hports and wrestling. The space of the open palestra in the 
Homan Imperial thermae, such as the baths of Caracalla, could have held 
more than one gymnasium like that of Priene. The form of the exedra also 
reappears, hut its hemicirdc is now a place for repose. It is no longer culture 
for the few, as in Athens. No Plato or Socrates could have developed amid the 
noise and crowds of the Homan palcstra. The function of the exedra, instruc­
tion and discussion, is now shifted to the outer zone of the thermae, where it 
is more peaceful and where there is room for assembly and for a library. 
The end to which a period solves its vaulting problems, or spreads out its 
designs, points abnost invariably to its dominant interest. In the Gothic period 
it is for the nave of the cathedral, in the nineteenth century it is for industry, 
railway stations, and international exhibition halls. In Home the cupola and 
barrel vaults, of a boldness unknown, appeared for the spanning of the vast 
areas of the tepidarium. Neither the fora, nor the amphitheatre, nor the circus 
buildings can rival the architectural originality of the thermae and their vast 
spatial problems. From the baths of Pompeii, or the Pantheon of Agrippa, to 
8 
the thermae of Constantine's epoch is as great a leap in architectural finesse 
as from the Homanesque to the late Gothic. 
Light flooded the high-vaulted bath halls, above all, that of the tepidarium. 
Daylight poured through the great half-circle windows, with their two jambs. 
6 
Tbe thermae of Constantine are known only by vestiges today underlying the Quirinal. 
632 