The Lepidaria of the thermae are, so far as we know, the first monumental inte­
riors into which full daylight could enter through extensive window apertur<>s. 
In the thermae of the forum at Ostia. Home's port at the mouth of the Tiber 
and a bathing resort of Homan society under Augustus and Claudius, a room 
at ground level was uncovered. The function of this room was for a time not 
quite clear. Its southern wall opens into a single span supported only by two 
marble pillars (fig. 442). What this opening formed was a wall of glass, the 
room, with its southern exposure, serving as a winter sun bath. 
The sociological invention lies in having made the place set aside for regen­
eration intD a social center. The Homans spent a great part of their leisure in 
the thermae, and the baths arose wherever the Homans settled - on farms, on 
estates, in cities large or small, and in the military camps of Africa and Britain. 
The Homan work day began at dawn, and normally ended at one or two 
o'clock. The thermae opened at noon.' One visited them at the close of work 
the main meal. Their purpose was daily regeneration. As in the gym­
before 
nasium, exercise in the palestra loosened up the body and stimulated circulation. 
This took time, as did a sojourn in the largest and most splendid of the rooms, 
the tepidarium, where perspiration was induced in about half an hour. Then 
the greater heat of the caldarium, culminating in a brief stay in the laconicum, 
whose hot, dry air, approaching 210° F., neared the limits of endurance. After 
that a soaping, a massage, and a plunge in1D the swimming pool of the frigi­
darium. Thus daily regeneration was inseparably bound up with Homan life. 
This does not mean that every Homan spent five hours in the thermae each 
day. But the baths were there; they were open to whoever wished to use them. 
Numerous foundations took care of that; Agrippa's baths were free as long as 
10 
they operated. The normal entrance fee was ridiculously low, and quite out 
of proportion to the expense and upkeep of the establishment. City thermae 
provided for the civilian public; those of military camps, for the legions. The 
Homan generals knew that tired soldiers fight badly. The wealthy stratum, 
who had mastered the art of otiose living, likewise used the thermae of their 
villas for social purposes. In the late Pompeiian Villa of Diomedes, the baths 
do not lie near the sleeping quarters, which are on a higher level, but to the left, 
directly opposite the entrance. 
One first hears of the thermae that they were places of erotic abuse. Yet the 
institution can no more be blamed for this than the automobile if it is occasion­
ally used for purposes other than transportation. Rostovtzeff has made it 
9 
The opening time varied with the seasons of the year and from period to period. 
ll} Hugo Bluemner, Die roemischen Privata.Uer!Umer, Miinchen, 1911, pp.420-35. Handbuch der Klas­
sischen Altertums-Wissenscbaft, Bd. 4, Abt. 2, Teil2. 
6S3 