plane.' A second bed was formed from the seats proper; in the words of the 
inventor, 'I open and extend these cushions of the seats, ... which are uphoJ­
stered on two sides, and fitted with hinges ... by raising them up and turning 
out the lower half.' Beds, these boardlike affairs? The inventor did not call 
them such. He saw himself as converting seats into couches. Indeed, between 
bed and couch no sharp line can be drawn. 
Economy of space is the mother of convertibility. 'As many seats by day, 
so many beds by night' went the rule of the early days. Often more beds would 
be conjured up than there were seats in the same place. This sleight could be 
achieved only if one of the beds were caused to disappear into the ceiling. It 
would reappear when needed, like the magic 'set-thyself' table at the wedding 
feast of Marie de Mooicis in Florence. 
A Detroit inventor for instance proposed in 1858: 
The upper bed . . is neatly and compactly fitted into the roof of the car, and when 
out of use is drawn up into its place by four counter-weights and cords from its corners, 
and no one would suspect anythirig but the roof to be there. . . . The bed is easily drawn 
down to the stops by the loop, with pillow and blanket upon it, ready for use for two 
77 
passengers (fig. 289). 
Thomas Jefferson had a strong predilection for mechanically actuated furni­
ture, automatic folding doors, and so on--- consider the wine-bottle elevator 
between his cellar and dining room. The beds in his home at Monticello were 
built into sleeping alcoves in the usual way. Alone Thomas Jefferson's own bed 
stood in a peculiar place (fig. 290). It filled the passage between his study and 
his dressing room. That it could be hauled ceilingward by ropes during the 
daytime, as an e11rly tradition maintains, is now denied. On the other hand, 
one can hardly understand his building it across an open passageway if he did 
not intend to make it disappem by day. The idea of an ascending bed is to be 
78 
found in an English patent for an invalid's bed (fig. 288), granted at the time 
when Jefferson was remodeling Monticello. In this patent a complicated mechan­
ism of lines, winch, gears, and retarding flywheel was provided to raise and lower 
the mattress frame between four sliding posts. 
The upper berth of the sleeping car is the real space-saving factor. But heds 
let down at the end of ropes no longer afforded a convincing solution. Even 
before the Detroit inventor's proposal, the present-day construction of the 
upper berth in the American sleeping car had been found. This happened toward 
the end of 1856, when the second patent was taken out. 
To lay bare at the first stroke a principle on which a whole later development 
77 U.S. Patent 21,352, 31 Aug. 1858. 
78 British Patent No. 2005, 7 Aug. 1794. 
460 