78 
drawing 'Washerwoman's assistant or Housewives' Economist' ~-such ma­
chinery was out of question for the household. 
No more than a minimum of skepticism is needed to tell one that these con­
trivances could neither assist the washerwoman nor hring economy to the house­
hold. It is a time of groping, in which the guiding principles were not to he 
discovered. It was too early. 
America before 1850: By its very nature America was moved more than any 
other country to invent compact and handy washing machines for household 
use. 
Both eighteenth-century England and America until 1850 started from the 
idea of directly imitating the to-and-fro movement of the hand. 
\Vhat the washerwoman accomplished with her fist, vigorously rubbing the 
fabrics against the rihhed washboard, the machine should now perform. Taking 
over her drudgery, the machine should, like her, scrnh and wash the clothes 
piece hy piece. 
In the first half of the nineteenth century, even in America where the mecha­
nisms were more simple, the eagerness for a direct solution often led to quite 
grotesque contraptions. To take one whose lineage dates back to the eighteenth 
79 
century, and which had a surprisingly long life, a model of 1846 (fig. 389): 
Here the to-and-fro motion of the human hand is imitated hy causing a curved 
receptacle to slide over a similarly curved hed of rollers, thus pressing and rub­
bing the linen caught between these two mechanisms." A threefold crank simul­
taneously swings the bed of rollers and the receptacle in opposite directions. 
The 'swinging hox for holding the clothes,' which also presses them against the 
washboard, is directly abstracted from the human hand. Despite its rather 
grotesque design, this type with the curved, mobile washboard and the container 
passing over it in an opposite direction has remained in use until well into this 
century, and is found, for instance, in Montgomery Ward's catalogue for 1927 
as 'Our Famous Old Faithful' (fig. 390). 
The inventor of 1846 readily admits that the idea of using a bed of rollers is 
not new. He asks credit only for its curved form, also given to the hox. Actually 
this awkward arrangement, which travels like a swing through the tuh, goes 
hack to English forerunners. There the idea already appears of replacing the 
hand hy a swinging and curved grating of boards, which rubs the linen and 
presses it against the bottom of the tub. 
78 British Patent No. 1882, 21 May 1792. Washmachine by John Harrison. 
79 U.S. Patent 4891, 15 Dec. 1846. 
110 It had its beginnings in England, British Patent No, 1772, 18 Aug. 1790. 
561 