THE NINETEENTH CENTURY: MECHANIZATION AND 
RULING TASTE 
The Beginnings of Ruling Taste: Empire Style 
Napoleon and the Devaluation of Symbols 
STRICTLY SPEAKING, the Empire style falls within the ten years of Napoleon's 
imperial reign, starting in 1804 and ending in 1314. With betwr reason it can 
be dated by the years during which its founders, Percier and Fontaine, kept up 
their close collaboration: from 1794 to 1814. Tbe influence of Style empire spread 
throughout the civilized world, from Ru,sia to America. In democratized form 
it long survived Napoleon's death. 
Napoleon's rise to empire gave sociological meaning to elements that lay at 
hand. The idea of a return to Classicism - thought of as 'simplicity' -- had 
already been toyed with. But when the revival finally came it proved far different 
from that intended by the purist worshipers of the classical (Lonis David, the 
painter, for instance, who chose the 'Etruscan Style' for his own ho11Se). 
Napoleon grew np in the eighteenth century. It was fim•ly rooted in his mind 
that every specific station in life had a corresponding enviromnent. His own 
setting, then, had to be created anew down to the last piece of furniture and 
the last ornament. This setting forms the backdrop to all his activity, yielding 
an intangible but ever-present resonance. The Empire 'style' is a portrait of 
Napoleon, an inseparable part of the Napoleonic figure. 
Is the Style empire, as so often claimed, the last of the great historic styles? 
Is it of the same order as that of Louis XV? Or is it a signal for all that will 
emerge in the nineteenth century? Is it a beginning or an end? 
One might equally well ask: Was Napoleon an emperor in the sense that 
Louis XIV- to compare him with a man of like calibre- was a king? Was 
his rule the legitim ate expression, the culmination of a social group? 
The difference is beyond question. Napoleon typifies the figure that later dom­
inated and shaped the nineteenth century: the self-made man. Only in time of 
great revolution can such men of boundless energy reach the top. Normal times, 
routine, and conservatism break them before they have started; it matters little 
in what domain the revolution takes place, whether in politics or in production. 
In the age of gnilds the self-made man could be only the exception, never the 
rule. The self-made men later arising in the economic reahn cannot be compared 
to Napoleon's giant proportions. But the sociological conditions that opened 
the way for their rise were in both eases the same. And- this is significant in 
our conrext- they face the world on similar terms. 
329 