of his eye. Hampered by insufficient capital, yet driven by a will to rival with 
the great packers, he chose another path. 
In the winter of 1875, the year he came to Chicago, and without hacking to 
36 
speak of, he began to transport in freight cars not livestock hut meat. Others 
before him had already experimented with the refrigerated car. But Swift 
made it his starting point and used it as a wedge. He saw in it a chance to bridge 
the gap between his lack of fnnds and his ambition. As the railroads that trans­
ported livestock refused their co-operation, he was forced to ship his meat hy 
a circuitous line, out of the question for normal business. Swift won this line 
over to his plan, after a wealthy Detroit firm had built ten cars for him in a 
magnanimous gesture~ against certain security." Then his ascent began. It 
was not an easy one. In his son's hook" it is told how the cars 'perversely failed 
to keep their perishable content fresh' and how Swift and his aides tried hy 
simple means to improve them. In the late 'seventies, when successful packers 
were already established on the spot with their large packillghouses, the whole 
field seemed fully divided, leaving small chances for an outsider with such ridicu­
lously meager capital. 
With the sureness of an expert, Swift threw all his energy into broadening 
his enterprise. He succeeded because of his powerful analytical gifts joined to 
a boldness for daring construction. 
Philip D. Armour (1832-1901) had, before coming to Chicago, already been 
a successful packer in Milwaukee, and with his brothers had founded plants 
outside of that city. A specialist in pork packing, he was also active in the grain 
market. He was a horn speculator. To this must he put down Armour's quarter­
century of feverish activities in Chicago. He, too, did not settle there before 
1875, choosing Chicago as his base of operations in what chanced to he the same 
year as Swift, who was seven years Armour's jnnior. This was the time when, 
as Swift's daughter pnts it, 'Chicago was the place where money conld he made 
39 
right on the ground floor.' 
Chicago's miraculous rise began in 1861-2, when the railroads were able to 
keep the city supplied with livestock and when the industry, processing half 
a million hogs yearly, was overtaking the old center, Cincinnati. Ontput nearly 
doubled in the first few years of the 'sixties. In 1860 the figure was still below 
400,000; hnt by 1862 the million mark was well exceeded (1.34 million). In 
1865 the Union Stock Yards were founded in keeping with the new scale of 
~6 Ibid. p.l85. 
3
7 Neither was this step accomplished without difficulty, for the packer Hammond attacked the cars 
on grounds of patent infring:ement. Swift, op.cit. p.l89. 
s8 Ibid. ch. 'Never Stay Beaten.' 
39 Helen Swift, My FatMr and My Mother, Chicago 1937, p.l27. 
1 
223 