123. Greener's Humane Cattle Killer. (Douglas's 
Encyclopedia, London) 
O¥~ner's Humane Cattle Killer, showing course of bullet. 
No mechanical instrument gave cnLire :::.atisfact.ion. The knife-wielding hand 
was stiU needed to inspect und finish the work of the machine. 
The present century turned to the more thorough practice of depilating. For 
this last cleaning, the carcass is plunged into a vat of molten wax, which when 
0 
cold is torn off in strips, taking every trace of hair along with it.' Only the 
organic can conform to the organic (fig. 121). 
The Mechanization of Death 
The phenomenon of mechanized death will be regarded here neither from the 
sentimentalist's point of view nor from that of the food manufacturer. What 
interests us is solely the relation between mechanization and death; such is our 
present concern. Both are involved in the mass production of meat. 
The development of this murder machinery can best be surveyed in the files 
of the Patent Office at Washington. There one can follow the manner in which 
bogs are slowly caught by their bind leg with the help of cunning devices; fed 
into the machinery, and, suspended in1ine, moved into the most favorable posi­
tion for killing; the manner in which cattle are skinned by means of pulleys, 
ropes, and levers (fig. 122), and hogs scraped by revolving cutters and grippers. 
The sole purpose of the drawings in the Patent Office is to illustrate the patent 
claim as clearly as possible. Yet freely viewed in their continuity, without 
regard to their technical interpretation and significance, they strike us as a 
danse macabre of our time. Their hare purposiveness is more direct, hence ntore 
impressive than the nineteenth-century portrayals of the relation of life to death. 
This schism is quite apparent in the famous woodcut series of the post-romantic 
7
~ When line production was npplied lo the processing of poultry in the 'thirties, similar methods were 
used: overhead conveyors, plucking machines -consisting of a drum strewn with elastic rubber fingers. 
We have seen this apparatus even in the smallest killing houses. Poultry packers also adopted the 
moulten-wax method for complete cleaning. 
240 