In 1783 the model of the automatic mill was complete and iu the two following 
years, 1784-5, the mill itself was built in Redclay Creek valley (figs. 44, 45). 
This mill could load from either boats or wagons; a scale determined the weight 
and a screw conveyor (or 'endless Archimedean screw' as Evans calls it) carried 
the grain inside to the point where it was raised to the top storey hy a bucket 
conveyor (or 'elevator for raising vertically'). It handled three hundred bushels 
au hour. From this elevator, the grain fell on the mildly inclined 'descender 
-a hroad endless strap of very thin pliant leather, canvas or flannel, revolving 
over two pulleys.' This belt was set in motion hy the weight of the grain and, 
as Evans adds, 'it moves on the principle of an overshot waterwheel.' A promi­
nent mechanical engineer remarks a century later: 'It is the prototype of belt 
conveyor of the present day, usually used for horizontal movement.' ' After 
intervening operations, the grain was carried down to the millstones and from 
the millstones hack to the top storey. Thus it made its way- which interests 
us here - through all the floors, from bottom to top and top to bottom, much 
as the automobile bodies in Henry Ford's plant of 1914. 
People refused to believe it would work. How could human hands be thus 
suddenly superseded? In a rather obscure passage written as a footnote to one 
of his books twenty years later, Oliver Evans could not keep himself from this 
comment: 
... The human mind seems incapable of believing anything that it cannot conceive and 
understand . . . I speak from experience, for when it was first asserted that merchant 
flour mills could be constructed to attend themselves, so far as to take meal from the 
stones, and the wheat from the wagons and raise them to the upper storeys, spreading the 
meal to cool and gathering it by the same operations into the bolting hopper, etc. until the 
flour was ready for packing, the projector was answered: You cannot make water run up 
6 
hill, you cannot make wooden millers.
But the mill Oliver Evans built for himself and his partners on Redclay Creek, 
1784-5, did work. The millers of the region came to look and 'they saw that 
all the operations of milling were going on without the care of any attendant 
7 
-cleaning, grinding and bolting ... without hwnan intervention.' 
On their return home they reported that 'the whole contrivance was a set of 
8 
rattle traps unworthy the attention of men of common sense.' But soon the 
economic advantages became clear. The mechanization of milling was soon 
accepted. Oliver Evans obtained a patent in I790 for his 'method of manu-
D Coleman Sellers, Jr., 'Oliver Evans and His Inventiom,' in The Journal of the Franklin Institute, 
Philadelphia, vol. xcn (1886), p.4. 
6 
In a short history of the steam engine in Youn,g Steam Engineer's Guide (Philadelphia, 1804), where 
he compares himself with the Marquess of Worcester, adding the above passage. 
1 
Coleman Sellers, Jr., op.cit. p.2. 
8
lbid. 
82 