generations are privileged to succeed where earlier inventors fall short of 
perfedion. 
There is no doubt that the modern washer, the machine for use in the small 
household, is typologically rooted in the year 1869. It belonged to those shelved 
inventions whose release awaited the coming of the small electric motor. 
To snm np, we find the types making their first appearance at these dates: 
1859 The vacnnm cleaner 
1865 The dishwashing machine 
1869 The modern type of washing machine 
Mechanization of the Smaller Tools Around 1860 
We cannot survey here the minor labor-saving devices that mechanize and 
take over various motions of the human hand. Yet these direct products of the 
American environment should not pass unnoticed. The apple-paring machines, 
meat choppers and egg beaters could, like patent furniture, have been invented 
in the fifteenth century so far as their mechanical equipment is concerned; yet 
they came about only with the general American recasting of work tools. Their 
principle, like that of all mechanization, consists in replacing the to-and-fro 
action of the hand by continuous rotary movement. 
Eli Whitney, inventor of the cotton gin, is said to have begun his career by 
devising a mechanical apple parer at the age of thirteen, in the 1770's. This 
seems a very early date, for the first anthenticized paring inventions begin with 
the nineteenth century. They are substantially improved in the 'thirties: a 
63 
single machine: claims to quarter and core the apple besides (fig. 378). The 
is impaled on a fork. The right hand rotates the shaft by means of a crank, 
frnit 
while the left hand guides the blade, 'until the apple is pared from one end w 
another in a continuous paring.' The frnit is then forced throngb a four-bladed 
quartering knife and cored. The principle is apparent at first glance: the action 
of the lathe has been extended to fruit. In the following decades, an iron frame 
will replace the wooden one and the blade will be guided automatically by a 
spring arm (fig. 379). In tbe 'sixties the mechanism reaches its standard form. 
Invention of domestic coring, slicing, paring, and dividing appliances was still in 
full swing during the 'nineties. The canning industry was then gradually coming 
to the fore, and here- a rare exception to the normal trend of mechanization 
- the small household device gave rise to large industrial paring-machines. 
This factory equipment still has the rotating prongs, the paring knife, and the 
6
3 U.S. Patent 686, 13 Apr. 1838. 
553 