helplessness as soon as their skill is applied to men instead of to machines. These 
devices have nothing of the century"s technological refinement. 
Finally we may cite the invention of a sixteen-year-old Cooper Union student, 
who, at least dexterously, exploited the observation that hot water, divided 
into a fine spray, turns almost instantly to steam. The young Arnerican's device 
consists of a 'portable, nickel-plated, perforated tuhc, running ahnost the length 
of the hathtuh.' "' As soon as the hot water 'in infinite division,' spurts from 
the tiny holes, the bathroom (if a ruhher cover is used, the tuh) fills with steam 
so that a satisfactory Russian hath may he enjoyed in one's own home without 
59 
effort (fig. 462). A hose connects the perforated tube to the water supply. 
That is all. 
The idea, assuredly, was not new. In the maghlas or steam room of the Islamic 
hath, a thin jet of hot water issuing from a pipe in the ceiling saturated the air. 
And the creation of spray hy means of a perforated tuhe is the principle of the 
lawn sprinkler. The only originality lay in applying the devices to domestic 
use. Such rudimentary apparatus may he regarded as symptomatic. It repre­
sents the vast areas in which the inventor seems to he dead. Why? Because a 
human orientation was lacking, and fantasy took flight in other directions. 
Attempts at Total Regeneration, c. 1850 
Priessnitz was one of the first to emhraee the total organism. Yet his efforts 
were still a matter of medical recourse. Now, in mid-century, the passage 
is made from rnedicioe to regeneration. This regeneration should he total in 
scope, cleansing the hody from within as well as without. Such a tradition has 
heen lost in Western culture. It was still found in the East, in Morocco and 
Turkey, where the Islamic hath continued to play its role in the pattern of life. 
'We must have a standard of cleanliness as well as of truth; such a rule we 
can owe neither to freak nor fashion. We must look for one tested hy long experi­
60 
ence and fixed from ancient days; -this standard is THE BATH.' Thus spoke 
around mid-century the English diplomat who hecarne the most ardent propa­
the reviving of regeneration in a total form. 
gandist for 
David Urquhart (1805-77) had heen attached for a time to the British embassy 
at Constantinople. He had iotimate knowledge of East European politics and 
possessed considerah!e literary skill. Urquhart was in love with the Orient and 
pledged to its cause. No one waged so obstinate a campaign for the reintro-
58 
A special company, the Portable Vapor bath and Disinfector Company, New York, was founded for 
this patent. Their pamphlet, New and Valuable Apparatus for Vapor Bath (New York, 1882) is preserved 
in the Library of the New York Academy of Medicine. 
11 
5 Ibid. p.ll. 
Gn Urquhart, The Turkish Bath, quoted in the Free Press, no. 13, 8 Nov. 1856, p.IOO, 
667 