gotten, just as the habit of sitting on chairs had fallen into oblivion in the early 
Middle Ages. Nineteenth-century medicine with its specialization knew less 
about the organism's reaction to sun bathing than Hippocrates, whose confident 
heliotherapeutic prescriptions suggest an experience gathered in the course of 
earlier ages. The Romans particularly enjoyed the sun hath. Everyone knew 
how to take it without ill effects. They like to avail themselves of it daily, 
sunnner and winter (fig. 442). When Seneca, looking hack to the exemplary 
mode of life in Scipio the African's time, cites Scipio's fortress-like house 
with its hath, half lit hy occasional window slits, adjoining the kitchen on the 
ground floor, he follows this description with a satirical comment on the soft­
of his own time, Nero's. 'We reckon a hath fit only for moth and vermin,' 
ness 
he writes in Epistle LXXXV, 'whose windows are not disposed so as to receive 
the rays of the sun during the whole course, unless we are washed and sun­
bathed at the same time.' 
Like Priessnitz, the Swiss Arnold Rikli bad to begin from scratch when he 
attempted to exploit systematically the effects of radiation. This was a quarter­
century after Priessnitz began his work at Graefenherg. In 1855, at the height 
72 
of hydrotherapy's vogue, Rikli too opened a nature-therapy establishment 
in which the main stress fell on the atmospheric cure. Ught and sun bathing, 
he discovered, favored more gradual and more organic healing than water used 
alone. Rikli proceeded with utmost prudence and circumspection until fourteen 
years of experience 'deeply convinced' him that air baths, that is, movement 
of the unclothed body in the open air 'formed the basic element of atmospheric 
cure and sun-bathing its necessary complement.' Later research bore him out 
in his insistence on bodily motion with the fewest possible coverings. Only 
thus can the easily weakened nltra-violet rays take effect. The sun hath, as 
Rikli continually emphasized, was hut the last stage of the atmospheric hath. 
He did not senselessly leave the body to roast in the sun until hurns appeared; 
he exposed the acclimatized organism to direct rays for about twenty or thirty 
minutes, keeping the head shaded. The patient lay on wool blankets on an 
inclined plane of boards. 
Thus Rikli's basic idea consisted in utilizing rays to which, beginning with 
the Middle Ages, our bodies had become unaccustomed. How far our clothes 
with their insulating effect derive from the fear of nakedness lies beyond our 
present discussion. We are concerned only with the results, and with tracing the 
uphill path that Rousseau, Priessnitz, Rikli, and many others had to tread toward 
a more organic way of life that was taken for granted in the Ancient World. 
72 At Veldes, Upper Carniola, Austria. It outlivt->d its founder, remaining in operation down to the first 
world war. The tradition was continued in Switzerland. 
672 