the tumhlers. The hitless key is 'a cylinder, containing as many wedge-shaped 
cavities or grooves (X) on its periphery as there are pistons.'"' Does not tl1is 
patent letwr of 1844 read like a description of the younger Yale's achievement? 
In order to lock the bolt the key must be pushed in as far as it will go, the inclined 
plane of the key comes in contact with the pistons (F) and forces them back until their 
pla{',e of union between the two parts of the tumbler is coincident with the joint between 
the inner revolving cylinder and the fixed outer cylinder which can be turned now by 
29 
the key.
Archetypes 
When the question arises where the lock of Linus Yale, Jr., came from, time 
and time again the reply has been, 'It came from the Egyptian lock.' Yet even 
the most recent excavations do not reveal much conceming the old Egyptian 
lock and how it developed. The so-called Egyptian lock certainly falls into the 
category of tumhler locks, hut it lacks one essential feature of the tumhler lock 
of medieval times: Its tumhlers are not aligned in one row; the iron pins project 
in various planes across the width of their horizontal bolder, like the bristles of a 
brush. It is still used in this form in humbler Egyptian dwellings. 
Howard Carter, who discovered the tomb of Tutankhamen, found some metal 
keys (fig. 39) in the course of Lord Carnarvon's expedition." According to 
Carter, they date from the Ptolemaic period (323-30 B.c.). The metal is bent 
in the shape of an L and the pins are disposed along a siunous line on the short 
arm. The lock it fitted is the product of a technically advanced period that flour­
ished under the Ptolemies, when Egypt hecame the center of Greek science and 
invention. Actually, this is a post-Egyptian period. 
More than a millennium later, the 'Egyptian lock' seems unchanged in l!rin­
ciple: A wooden lock, its case carved from a block of sycamore wood (c.A.n. 
800), was found by the expedition of the Metropolitan Museum, buried among 
31 
the ruhbish of a eel! in the monastery of Epiphanius at Thebes (fig. 40). It 
is of the same type as the lock of the Ptolemaic period, hut greatly simplified. 
It, too, is L shaped, but its pins, although only two in mm1ber, are not aligned. 
To urdock, one had to raise the bolt from beneath hy inserting and lifting the 
iron key. Since this type has persisted - it is still in use on modest dwellings 
2s Linus Yale, Sr., Patent Letter, 1844. 
29 
Ibid. 
n We owe this information to the kindness of Ambrose Lansing, curator of the department of Egyptian 
art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York. 
Ill Herbert E. Winlock and Walter E. Crum, The Monastery of Epiphanius at Thebes, New York, 1926, 
Part I, p.57. 
71 