with plywood chairs were methodologically knit into the program of studies. 
Flat sheets of various materials are to he given a three-dimensional structure. 
By such manipulations as bending, embossing, etc., the structural properties 
of the material can he changed. In this way Charles Niedringhaus and others 
produced models such as one on 'runners,' having a sharp Z profile (fig. 335), 
whose plywood seat permits slight variations in posture. The younger genera­
tion of American architects, such as Eero Saarinen and Charles Eames, com­
bine production-line methods with sensitive designs. 
In closing, we should not pass over the question: Was it only the demand for 
new techniques that gave fresh life to the wooden material and set free its hidden 
potentialities? The causes go deeper than that; to the trend toward the organic 
that asserted itself in the early 'thirties and gained strength in following years. 
We want around us objects that bear the trace of life. Bark, grotesque roots, 
shells, fossils. Things that have passed through time and tide. Paiating again 
gives objective confirmation when, in the early 'thirties, the work of Joan Miro 
or Hans Arp betrays a growing drift to the organic. Joan Miro wins freedom of 
expression by the nse of organic forms, sometimes rounded and fishlike, some­
timee snakelike, often calligraphic symbols, but always freely floating in space 
without naturalistic moorings. And Hans Arp cuts his wooden forms on the 
handsaw, placing them by the rule of chance-' objets places a Ia loi du 
hazard.' 
The Diffusion 
We have but roughly outlined the beginnings of the movement that sought 
to bridge the split of a century between expression and construction. The 
development, in pace with the new architecture, matured rapidly, the tubular 
chair appearing from 1925 to 1929 and the cantilever plywood chair directly 
afterwards. 
It is distinctly a furniture of types. The chairs, tables, cupboards, beds, desks, 
bookshelves, and combination furniture- of which we shall say nothing here 
-all had to he formulated afresh. Unlike the true furniture of the nineteenth 
e,entury, the furniture of the engineer, these new types no longer stood in au alien 
setting. The architects first created the surrounding spaces, and then, from 
the same spatial feeling, their furniture. The types are conceived in functional 
terms. They may call new materials into use, or use traditional materials in 
new ways, but their vigor is above all one of esthetic invention, one rooted in 
508 