The flutist, which Vaucanson submitted to the Pans Academy of Science for 
examination in 1738 and which, says Diderot, was seen by all Paris, possessed 
lips that moved, a moving tongue that served as the air-flow valve, and movable 
fingers whose leather tips opened and closed the stops of the flute. On the same 
principle Vaucanson constructed a drummer, who at the same time played a 
three-holed shepherd's pipe. Even more admired was the mechanical duck. 
It could waddle and swim. Its wings imitated nature in every detail 
and they beat the air. It would wag its head, quack, and pick up grain, the 
passage of which could be observed in swallowing movements. A mechanism 
inside ground up the grain and caused its exit from the body much as in natural 
circumstances. 'It was necessary in a little space to construct a chemical lab­
oratory, to decompose the main constituents [of the grain] and cause them to 
issue forth at will.' It was thus described in the Encyclopedic of 1751' by no 
less a contributor than the mathematician D'Alembert. Vaucanson had exhibited 
his duck in 1741, according to the Encyclopedic, whose report directly reflects 
the impression made upon the most advanced contemporaries by this marvelous 
mechanism. D'Alemhert, in his description of the flutist,' points out that he is 
reproducing the greater part of Vaucanson's own account,' 'which seemed to 
us worthy of preservation,' and tbe acute critic Diderot cannot but exclaim with 
unwonted enthusiasm at tbe end of D'Alembert's article, 'What finesse in all 
6 
these details; what delicacy in all the parts of this mechanism ... .' Indeed, 
in addition to a love of the marvelous, Vaucanson's automatons and the long 
line of similar creations by others reflect the extraordinary mechanical subtlety 
of the eighteenth century. 
The philosopher Condorcet, who succeeded Vaucanson in the Academic des 
Sciences, mentions in his eloge that Frederick the Great had sought to attract 
7 
him to the Potsdam court in 1740. But in 1741 Cardinal Fleury, tbe real ruler 
of France, named V aucanson 'Inspector of the Silk Manufactures.' It is then 
that his genius turns to the mechanizing of production. He makes numerous 
improvements in spinning and weaving, and proves himself a foresighted organ­
izer. About 17 40 he constructs a mechanical loom for figured silks. Its heddles 
are automatically raised and lowered by means of a drum pierced with holes, 
on the same principle that controlled the air supply and the selection of notes 
in his flutist. In Alexandria we already find mechanisms being released by 
3 
Encyclopedie ou Dictionnaire raisonne, vol. I, p.l96. 
4 
Ibid. under 'Androide,' pp.44·8-5l. 
5 
J. de Vaucanson, Mkanisme d'un jluteur mkcanique, Paris, 1738. 
6 Encyclopedic, p.451. 
7 
Condorcet, 'F..Joge de Vaucanson,' in HisWire de l' Academie Reyale des &iences, Ann& 1782, Paris, 
1785. 
35 