were for the most part of the exceptionally light 'balloon frame' construction" 
invented in Chicago during the 'thirties and transportable in packaged form 
everywhere. 
The impetuous mechanization of af,'Ticulture in the Middle West eame about 
hy a coinciding of developments at one point in time. Among these was trans­
portation. The canal system, linking the Middle West with the Hudson and 
New York on the one hand and with Quebec on the other, came into being 
between 1825 and 1850. Bnt it washy means of the rail that the Middle West 
was truly conquered. 
When around 1850 the first miles of track sprang forth from Chicago into the 
Prairie, the signal was given for an irresistible development." Within one decade 
a dense network of railroads, all converging upon Chicago, had crossed and 
42 
recrossed the prairie. The lines were laid down in short sections. The settlers 
are reported usually to have reached the area about to be tapped by the railway 
43 
shortly ahead of the tracks. The most energetic period of development is 
crowded in the short interval between 1855 and 1865, at the close of the Civil 
War. 
The Trans-Siberian railroad, built between 1891 and 1905, likeVIise attracted 
settlers and expanded the area under cultivation. Here, as in the Middle-Western 
prairie, the soil was fertile and shot with fine black sand. But it was ouly a local 
event confined within the near-hermetically sealed empire of the Tzar. Here 
eame no bold agricultural adventurers or new methods. Beside what occurred 
in the Middle West, the Trans-Siberian railroad remained a solitary track cross­
ing the wilderness. 
The Carriers of Mechanization 
The Reshaping of Tools in America 
Agriculture comes within the sphere of complicated handicrafts. Animals, 
plants, and earth embody within themselves all the variety and all the riches 
of nature. Bringing machines to perform the work of the human hand proved 
a more difficult and wearisome task here than in industry, which deals with the 
processing of materials. 
4US. Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture, pp.269-77. 
41 Some remarks thereon will be found in our chapter 'Meat,' pp.218-19. 
42 The development of the railroad network down to 1860 has hL>en clearly represented on a number of 
maps by P. W. Bidwell and J. L. Falconer, op.cit. 
43 Joseph Schafer, A Hi.~ lory of Agricullure in W V.-consin, Madison, \Vis., 1922, p. -1.2. 'The l\'lilwaukce 
and Mississippi H.ailroad, begun in 1349, built gradually westward by short sections and sent its surveyors 
forward ahead of the construction parties. Our record of land entries shows that prospective settlers 
reached an area about to be tapped by the railway very soon.' 
146 