13 
Archimedean screws for the raising of water (fig. 43). But Oliver Evans was, 
so far as we know, the first to use it horizontally, for the transportation of solids. 
'The Henaissance theorists Me concerned with snnple operations: they aim to 
raise a heavy load or to transmit force with the aid of lever, gear, or pulley 
systems. Their work sometimes may assume grandiose form, as when Domenieo 
Fontana (1543-1607), architect, engineer, and town-planner to Sixtns V, lowered 
the Vatican obelisk on the south side of Saint Peter's, transported it, and raised 
it on its present site. In contrast to the clumsy proposals of his rivals, Fontana 
in 1586 used forty sets of windlasses driven hy horses to swing the monolith 
around its center of gravity, while all Rome watched in silence. 
All these were tasks of simple lifting and moving, a class to which modern 
c-ranes for the handling of coal, minerals, and other goods in harbors, factories, 
or freight yards also belong. 
For Oliver Evans, hoisting and transportation have another meaning. They 
are hut links within the continuous production process: from raw material to 
finished goods, the human hand shall be replaced by the machine. At a stroke, 
and without forerunner in this field, Oliver Evans achieved what was to become 
the pivot of later mechanization. 
Evans' method had no analogy in its Lime. Yet nothing is harder for man 
than to frame ideas for the barely conceivable future; by nature we tend to 
approach all things by analogy, be it science and production methods, or emo­
tional phenomena, as in art. 
Arthur Schopenhauer once descrihed talent as hitting a mark which ordinary 
man cannot reach; genius as sighting a point which others cannot even see. 
Outwardly Oliver Evans' invention was, as his contemporaries said sneeringly, 
'a set of rattle traps.' Moreover, Evans was not, like Benjamin Franklin, a 
master in dealing with men. Nothing favorable came of his other inventions, 
14 
among which one at least is of a vision that takes us somewhat aback.
His late successors were far more fortunate in achieving continuous line pro­
duction. They had an advanced technology to work with and were assisted hy 
an age bent upon nothing more strongly than production. 
To the historian it does not matter whether a man joins the successful or the 
stranded, whether he himself carries his invention from conception to the last 
13 Agostino Ramelli, Le Diverse el Arti[JCiose Mpchine Del Capitano Agostino Ramelli, A Parigi, 1533. 
a We are thinking not so much of his 'amphibious digger,' a steam-dredging machine for cleaning 
the docks of the city (1804, cf. G. Bathe, op.cit. p.l03), or of his high-pressure steam engine, as of the 
astonishing precision with which he laid down a method for mechanical ice making that remained current 
during a half century. See below, p.599. 
85 