William Coke, Earl of Leicester, 1752-1842, inherited the Holkham estate, 
48,000 acres of poor Norfolk soil, and took over its management. He succeeded 
in rendering it fertile hy turning the subsoil topmost. His vast estate, surrounded 
hy a ten-mile wall, became the first experimental farm, on which Coke tried out 
crops of every type. The revenue of the land rose, through his efforts, from £2,200 
to £20,000. His sheep shearings, held in Holkham down to 1821, drew a Euro­
pean attendance. It is consonant with the vigor of this gentleman farmer that 
his marriage at the age of sixty -nine with a girl of eighteen gave him five sons 
20 
and a daughter. None of these gentlemen farmers wrote on agriculture. 
The transformation of the feudal lord into a large-scale entrepreneur went 
hand in hand with the expansion of his wealth through the enclosure of the 
common lands. This was the surrounding of a piece of land with hedges, ditches, 
and other barriers to the free passage of men and animals, its collective use heing 
abolished." Thus the laborer was disenfranchised and hecame entirely depend­
ent on wages. The dispossession of the free yeoman and management hy the 
landowner gained impetus through the eighteenth century; the movement 
22 
reached its peak in the opening of the nineteenth. The outcome is well known. 
Here we would make hut one point: The concentration of the workers upon large 
estates might seem to foretell a mechanization of agriculture similar to the one 
that was heing prepared in this period in the textile industry. The work of the 
anonymous, as well as of the gentlemen farmers, was to improve the soil and its 
produce. Mechanization had little to do with this change. 
The literary spokesmen, Arthur Young, 1741-1820, and Sir John Sinclair, 
1754-1835, came in the wane of the gentleman-farmer movement. They wit­
nessed its peak and its decline. Their writings and influence spread far and 
wide, from Russia and Catherine II to Washington and Jefferson in North 
America. Arthur Young was a son of the middle class; Sinclair, a scion of the 
Scottish landowning gentry. Arthur Young, hardly more successful as a farmer 
than his contemporary the educator Pestalozzi, 1746--1827, hut like him fanati­
cally attracted to the land, roused widespread attention hy his agricultural travels, 
the Tours, and through his Annals of Agriculture, to the volumes of which the 
foremost authorities contributed. In addition to tending his estate, Sinclair com­
piled a Statistical Account of Scotland in 21 volumes, 1791. 
Sinclair's name is associated with the foundation of the semi-official Board of 
2o William MacDonald, The Makerg of Modern AgricuUure, London, 1913. 
n Gilbert Slater, The English Peasantry and the Enclosure of Common Fields, London, 1907, pp.l, 2. 
"'Ibid. p.267. Statistics are given Cor the yearly enclosures at different periods from 1727 to 
1815. 
139 