near. The turn of the century marks this point. In the year 1902, J. 0. Armour, 
Gustavus Swift, and his son-in-law, Edward Morris, joined to form a cartel, the 
'National Packing Company,' later dissolved hy order of the law. 
Single Operations in Mechanized Meat Production 
The operations of the hutcher, slaughtering hy handicraft methods, are often so 
merged into one another as to he difficult to separate. As soon as mass production 
was used to turn the live animal into salable meat, sharp and thorough division 
into single operations became necessary, as in all mechanization. 
Interest in the rapid conversion of the animal into meat centered from the 
first around the pig. This was as true of the half-million hogs processed in the 
United States in 1850 as for the five and a half million ahout two decades later." 
Today some twenty-four separate operations are counted before the live hog 
has heen reduced to two halves traveling on conveyors into molers. Three 
phases can be distinguished.. Organization set out to make up for the loss of 
time that nature enforces, and so far as possihle to approach mntinuous flow. 
The first phase comprises the slaughtering process: The pig is seized hy its 
hind leg, around which a chain is looped; this is made fast to a great rotating 
drum some twelve feet in diameter. As the drum slowly revolves (two to three 
revolutions per minute) the animal is drawn backwards and up until, hanging 
head bottommost, it has become a defenseless ohj!"'t· It is carried arouud with 
the wheel and, after reaching the peak of its ascent, is transferred hy a simple 
device to an overhead rail, on which it glides to the slaughterer's reach. Expe­
rience has proved this rotary hog-hoisting method the best means of avoiding 
'loss of time in catching and hoisting ... the most rapid means of raising them 
54 
to the track hars.' The whole process requires harely half a minute, but a 
nmnher of hogs are held in readiness in the hleeding passage. 
large 
In the semnd phase the animal is cleansed of slime, blood, and dirt, and hair 
and bristles are removed. The scalding harrel of the hutcher has hemme a 
steam-heated scalding vat. Hot water makes the skin elastic and softens the 
hairs and bristles. An inclined rail moves the animal to the hog-scraping machine, 
which ahnost completely shaves it, even to the head and feet. This second stage 
ends when the tendons of the hind legs are bared, and a gambrel stretched 
between them, which is huug to a small trolley connected to the endless chain. 
The third stage prepares the carcass for the cooler, where it must lose its animal 
heat. So far the production process could progress more or less mntinuously. 
n According to Ha:rper's Weekly, Mar. 1872 to Mar. 1873. 
M William Douglas & Son, Encyclopedia. A book of reference for all industries associated with the 
meat, pork, provision, and general food trade, London, 1903, p.451. 
228 