effects of the radio and cinema is an inviting task. But such research pertains 
to fields other than ours and demands the teamwork of many disciplines. 
In the time of full mechanization still newer developments set in, whose drift 
and implications cannot be foreseen. It is no longer replacement of the human 
hand by the machine, but of intervention into the substance of organic as well 
as of inorganic nature. 
In the inorganic, it is the exploration of the structure of the atom and its 
use for as yet unknown ends. 
One sphere is already taking clearer shape: one that intervenes directly into 
organic substance. Here the demand for production delves into the springs of 
life, controls generation and procreation, influences growth, alters structure and 
species. Death, generation, birth, habitat undergo rationalization, as in the 
later phases of the assembly line. The host of unknowns that these processes 
involve makes uneasiness hard to dispel. Organic substance or inorganic, it is 
experimentation with the very roots of being. 
What occurs in art in this period gives the most intimate insight regarding 
how deeply mechanization penetrated man's inner existence. The revealing selec­
tion in Alfred Barr's 'Cubism and Abstract Art' (N. Y., 1936) tells in what dif­
ferent ways the seismographic artist responded to the beginning of full mechani­
zation. At this point we can no more than give a few hints of the many-sidedness 
of this perception. 
Mechanization has penetrated down to the artist's subconsciousness. The 
dream Giorgio de Chirico reports his most obsessive (1924) intermingles the image 
of his father with the daemonic strength of the machine:' I struggle in vain with 
the man whose eyes are suspicious and very gentle. Each tin1e I grasp him, he 
frees himself by qnietly spreading his arms ... like those gigantic cranes ... .' 
(J. Thrall Soby, G. de Chirico.) 
The same anxiety and loneliness pervade the melancholic architectures of his 
early period and his tragic mechanical dolls, portrayed in every detail, yet dis­
qnietingly taken to bits. 
On the other hand there are Leger's large canvasses, aronnd 1920, building the 
city's image out of signs, signals, mechanical fragments. There are Russians and 
Hrrngarians, themselves far from mechanization, yet inspired by its creative power. 
In the hands of Marcel Duchamp and others, machines, these marvels of 
efficiency, are transformed into irrational objects, laden with irony, while intro­
ducing u new aesthetic language. The artists resort to elements such as machines, 
mechanisms, and ready-made articles as some of the few true products of the 
period, to liberate themselves from the rotten art of the ruling taste. 
44 