COMFORT IN THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 
France: Rococo and Natnre 
A QVARTER "ILLENNimr elapses between the wane of the late Gothic and the 
full development of the Hococo in the fourth decade of the eighteenth century. 
Yet our leap is not an arbitrary one. The next truly inventive impulses in the 
sphere of comfort came only in the late Baroque, of which the Rococo is a 
phase. 
Late periods sometimes have a privileged role. W11ile standing distinct from 
earlier time, they possess a heritage of slowly gathered experience. They play 
with confident mastery upon the expression of their age. The idiom has become 
second nature, and tasks at which their forerunners had stopped they can now 
perform with ease. 
The late Gothic of the fifteenth century and the late Baroque of the eighteenth 
are such periods. In the late Gothic, the atmosphere and values of monasticism 
were drawing to their end; in the late Baroque, worldliness of the Henaissance 
yielded its full consequences. These periods were enabled both to summarize 
the experience of many generations and to initiate a new development. 
The Building of Receptacles 
The Renaissance was less prolific of new impulses in the sphere of furniture 
than it was in painting or in architecture. It elaborated in detail what the late 
Gothic had broadly prepared. The trend to display pieces became increasingly 
pronounced in the course of the sixteenth century, recalling the drift from auster­
ity to sumptuousness under the Roman Empire. Yet the Renaissance contribu­
tion was not an insignificant one. 
Receptacle furniture and seating furniture, the two categories branching from 
the chest, move to further differentiation, the receptacles especially. The chair, 
toward mid-sixteenth century, was becoming an article of current use. In the 
various receptacles elaborated at this time, nnusual care is given to that element, 
coming everywhere into demand, the drawer. Drawers of all sizes and proportions 
are built into secretaries and credenzas. There can never he too many of them. 
Framed hy rich carvings and moldings, each one calls the eye to its presence. 
Italy was the leader, during the sixteerrth century, in all matters of form and 
technique. Feudalistic city-states, each with its individual development, were 
dispersed over the whole penin,uJa. There, secretaries and credenzas were 
especially favored. Italian secretaries have come down to us from around 1500 
and credenzas from the 1530's on. 
305 