Railroads and Patent Furniture 
The French report on the Centf'nnial Exposition of 1876 at Philadelphia is a 
thorough guide to the tools, machines, furniture, and other implements there 
48 
displayed. The reporter, looking for an adequate term to explain their pecu­
liarity to tbe French public, could find no other expression than 'Pullman car 
style.' He was alluding to simple outlines and plane surfaces, free of ornamental 
overgrowth. These are the characteristics that naturally emerge in the course 
of mechanized production. To the European of 1870 or 1880, who used mechani­
zation to simulate handwork, plain furniture must have appeared as something 
out of ken, as something not yet named, that most suitably was to be labeled 
after the most popular product of the American development: the Pullman car. 
Instinctively the right word was chosen. The sleeping car associated with 
Pullman's name is almost the sole survivor of the immense group of patent furni­
ture. The sleeping car alone has continued to develop without break to this 
day. All the other categories - excepting purely technical furniture - suffered 
a setback around 1893 from which they never recovered. 
To th~ contemporary of 1855 all these ventures in building barbers', dentists', 
and invalids' chairs that would be comfortable, suited to function and to physio­
logical demands, ranked on a par with the patent reclining railroad chairs. Even 
the now forgotten models of convertible sofas and folding beds were regarded 
as important as the earliest, trail-breaking patrnts for tbe upper berth. 
If we probe the now commonplace notion of the 'sleeping car' and ask: Of 
what elements does it really consist? we flnd two widespread types of furniture 
-the convertible seat for the lower berth and the folding bed for the upper. 
And if we put the same question for the ordinary American coach, it too proves 
to be based on a particular type of patent furniture that was elaborately devel­
oped, the reclining chair. Sleeping car and coach, parlor car and dining car, 
are typical products of the American movement. They sprang from patent 
furniture, from the aspiration to create a new type of comfort. 
Even today a wide gap separates the American conceptions of the traveler's 
comfort from the European. 
The Traveler's Comfort 
The extraordinary comfort tbat has slowly developed in American travel 
undoubtedly bad something to do with tbe great distances. Overproduction -
private lines competing against one another- also was a contribnting factor. 
But the basic reasons must be sought in another sphere; they are to be found in 
48 Quoted in Giedion, Space, Ti'me and Archiiecture, p.263. 
439 