71 
sickle-shaped blades attached to a lever was patented. But this machine, like 
tbe vacuum cleaner and the dishwashing machine, joined the shelved inventions. 
There were reasons for this. To work satisfactorily, the modern bread-slicing 
machine, as a leading expert remarks, requires bread such as only present-day 
n1echanization can produce, loaves of absolute unifonnity, soft in crust and 
72 
regular in crumb 
As a rule the slicers form a unit with the wrapping machines, also introduced 
relatively late, in 1913-14. From these the wrapped product is conveyed directly 
to trucks waiting in rows on the ground floor. 
Viewing the entire cycle, we find that the time saved by these mechanisms is 
out of proportion to their complexity. In the double mixing (sponge-dough) 
method we have described, some eight and a half hours are required before the 
flour is transformed into finished bread. The main time saving over earlier 
methods lies in the use of quicker rising yeast, which reduces the fern1entation 
period from nine to approximately four and a half hours. There are quicker 
ways- the straight dough method -in which one mixes all tbe ingredients 
at once. Fermentation time can thus be cut to three and a half hours. But 
general preference is for the longer, sponge-dough method. 
Tbe decisive saving rests not in acceleration of the process but in the enormous 
ontput that mechanization and the assembly line render possible. 
The bread-making process refuses to be hastened beyond narrow limits; for 
mechanization here encounters an organic substance ''hose laws are inviolable. 
Antoine Augustin Parmentier defined dough (1778) as the soft, flexible, and 
uniform substance obtained by thoroughly mixing flour, water, air, and leaven 
(for yeast was not yet used in bread baking). Today one might add that tbis 
substance is not a static one, but an organic body ever in flux, a highly sensitive 
culture whose incubation must be carefully controlled in every phase of its 
mass manufacture with the aid of thermometers and hot-air chambers. We 
have bad occasion to see how after each mechanical intervention a pause of 
varying length is required to restore tbe interrupted activity of the enzymes. 
In the mechanized process, more subdivisions and pauses, and far greater cau­
tion, are necessary than in hand baking. 
Wherever mechanization encounters a living substance, bacterial or animal 
ahnost indifferently, it is the organic substance that determines the law. 
71 
W. B. Vincent, Machine for Cutting Bread, Soap and Black Lead, U.S. Patent 52627, 13 Feh.1866, 
Boston, Mass. 
7
2 Julius B. Wihlfahrt, Treatise on Baking, New York, 1934. 
195 