With the awakening of interest in things Oriental around 1830, the 'Turkish' 
hath impressed itself npon the notice of European travelers. An English dip­
lomat, David Urquhart, was foremost in recognizing its human significance. 
He dreamed of bringing such baths to the industrial towns of mid-nineteenth­
century England, as regeneration for all classes. When Urquhart first encoun­
tered the hammam, in Greece in 1830, it still flourished under the patronage of 
the well-to-do. Around 1850, its decline under Western irdluence could be fure­
seen, although there were as yet no bathrooms in the apartments. It seems to 
have been fmally doomed when the mechanized hath hegan to penetrate the 
Oriental world. The hammams lost their wealthy patrons. Only the poorer 
elasses, Pauty reports, now use the baths. Stripped of their ornaments, their 
carpets, their mosaics, the hammams have lapsed into dirtiness. The upper 
classes have adopted our habits and are now content with bathrooms in their 
own living quarters. 
The Steam Bath as a Social Institution 
Bathing in steam-saturated air is at once the simplest and the cheapest type 
of hath that will cleanse the body with desirable thoroughness. The moist 
heat stimulates the skin and sweat glands, promoting the elimination of waste 
products. A pile of heated stones and a pail of water is all the equipment needed. 
Such bathing is on record from the time of Herodotus on; it existed in the clas­
sical world, much as in any village of Russia or Finland today. The vapor hath's 
popularity hegins with the twelfth century and perhaps even earlier. Like 
the wooden tumbler lock, it is found everywhere. But, in keeping with its trend, 
the nineteenth century produced no inventor who, with an eye to human needs, 
might have shaped the medieval vapor hath into an institution adequate to 
our period as successfully as Linus Yale transformed the wooden tumbler lock 
into a marvel of mechanization. 
THE LATE GOTHIC VAPOR BATH 
From Russia and Finland the archetype of the steam and hot-air hath con­
tinued its march toward Western Europe. Its full development occurs in the late 
Middle Ages. 
In the West no less than in Russia, the medieval vapor hath was thought of 
as a social in.,.;;titution. Few differences exist between a Finnish sauna, a Siberian 
hath hut, and the late Gothic vapor hath, 'sweat-houSC ' 'stew,' or 'stove,' 
1
which we see depicted in Albrecht DUrer's 'Woman's Bath' (1496) (fig. 450). 
DUrer had just returned from his first journey to Italy. In this drawing, he 
wished to portray various postures of the female nude. He songht his models 
644 