house along more hygienic lines. Napoleon's first decree dates from the year 
1807, when he ordered the hnilding of public slaughterhouses. 'Ihe fleshers as 
a body were pledged to slaughter nowhere else. In this way, five slaughter­
houses were erected outside the city walls as they then stood, three to the north 
and two to the south of the Seine. In 1810 Napoleon issued a second decree, 
requiring that public slaughterhouses be hnilt in every town of France, and -
it was specified - outside the city limits.' This sanitary reform was to put an 
end to the murky doings of previous centuries. In the early years, public slaugh­
terhouses spread rapidly through France and Belgium. With ever-fewer excep­
tions, they remained municipal property. They were regarded not as sources of 
revenue, hut as centers where the animals could he slaughtered under super­
vision. This left the position of the small butcher ahnost unchanged. To this 
day, in Europe, the areas from which the eattle are supplied have remained pre­
ponderantly loeal. 
The 'abattoirs' of Napoleon I also gave their name to the American establish­
ments and were still regarded as models of their kind up to shortly before the 
opening of La Villette. A pamphlet of 1866 remarks: 'Althongh the name of 
abattoir has been given to these erections [American slaughterhouses]- taking 
the Parisian abattoirs as our models- we neither have perfected arrangements 
for cleanliness nor protection agaiust fire nor conveniences.' We further learn 
that Napoleon's abattoirs 'are all conducted in the most rigid manner hy a gnild 
or corporate body of butchers. . . . The butchers have all their work done hy 
regular slaughterers at slight cost.' Moreover, the slaughterers retain 'an addi­
tional prerequisite in the blood, rough offal, etc.' Of these, the blood is held the 
most valuable part. It may he noted that hy mid-century the Wood is already 
being saved and its value further exploited in industrial establishments. 'It is 
saved separately in stone wells, afterwards subjected to a scientific process, 
5 
aftex which it is used for refining sugar and manuring the earth.' 
Just as Haussmann had eularged Napoleon's Rue de Rivoli, so with the 
slaughterhouse of La Villette he took up a previously initiated development 
and pnrsned it further. Hanssmann toiled over the slaughterhouse of La Vil­
lette with painstaking care, one might ahnost say with the consciousness of a 
mission to fullil, on a seale so generous that the period has nothing to olfer in 
comparison. It heeame the abattoir, a prototype for the rest of the century, 
just as the boulevards and public parks of Haussmann's Paris became models 
from which every growing metropolis of the Continent took pattern. 
4 Handbuch der Archileklur-, 4.Teil, 3.Halbband, Darmstadt, 1884, p.l82. 
&Thomas DeVoe, Ab4iioirs, Paper read before the Polytechnic branch of the American Institute, 
Albany, 1866, p.l9. 
210 