raise the hair about to he cut hy the Wade, a leather-covered jaw was provided; 
and instead of the knife, an interchangeable steel blade. These parts were con­
nected hy a spring arm or a scissors-type handle. The New York inventor gave 
his instrument, which resembled 'in form and size the conllilon sugar~ tong,' 
the name of 'clamp fur knife.' 'The pelt is confined upon a form or heam ... 
it will he found much better if a beam he used as broad as the pelt and slightly 
rounded ... cushioned and covered with lntlian rnhher.' 
It is a hroad step from this furriers' implement to the first proposal for the 
'hog-cleaning machine,' as it was then called (fig. ll8). The suggestion was put 
65 
forward in 1864. The specification of this earliest attempt to put the whole 
carcass through a machine that would shave off hair and bristles clearly states 
its objective: 'The nature of my invention consists in applying to the whole 
hody of scalded hogs, disks, Wades, or other devices ... formed ... to present 
sufficient force or adhesion and yet be elastic erwugh to yield to the irregularities 
of the hody ,' Firm pressure and a yielding adaptation- lest the skin he cut 
into and damaged- were the desiderata for which multifarious solutions were 
offered. 
This inventor of 1864 raises in succession two iron hoops of 36-inch diameter, 
one behind the other, like the hoops through which circus dogs le""P· The first 
hoop is ftlled by a rubber disk having a hole some 12 inches in diameter in its 
center. The second hoop consists of two rings of steel blades or scrapers. 'They 
will converge all to a common center yet leaving a hole of four inches': in other 
words they are arranged rather like the leaves of a diaphragm. The pig, hooked 
by the snout to an endless chain, was to he towed first through the rubber, then 
throngh the steel ring. The inventor holds great expectations for the machine's 
efficiency. 'It is calculated ... the capacity of this machine is from five to 
fifteen thousand hogs per diem.' All this may sound fantastic and improhahle. 
However, not only did it represent an early experimental use of rubber 'to yield 
to the irregularities of the body,' but this proposal for elastic steel scrapers, 
concentrically arrayed, is found again in practical models four decades later; 
now, however, they arc arranged funnel-wise and claw at the carcass like the 
legs of a spider (fig. 120). 
This idea of 1864 eould expect little success in its primitive form. Ten years 
later the same inventor returns with a second proposal. Now he imagines a 
'series of rollers, armed with spring scrapers, revolving simultaneously about 
66 
their respective axes.' The arrangement of the individual rollers made for 
Gs U.S. Patent 44,021, 30 Aug. 13M, N. Silverthorn. 
66 US. Patent 153,183, 28 Jan. 1874, N. Silverthorn. 
238 