particles ... washing means neutralizing the cohesion ... common soap possesses 
86 
these neutralizing properties' (fig. 395). 
After this the inventor, James T. King, proudly announces that he has mecha­
nized the process without imitating the hand. 'Other inventors have tried to 
succeed by imitating as nearly as possible the common process of washing by 
rubbing, pressure or friction ... in our machines the clothes are alternately in 
steam and in suds; the former opens the fibres and the latter removes the dirt. 
Therefore no rubbing, pounders, or dashers.' 
This cylinder type became the most popular one of the 'seventies, to judge 
the number of patents, and in the 'eighties it appears fully developed with 
by 
an inside cylinder made of sheet iron stamped with holes. The idea of putting 
87 
washables in a rotating cage or cylinder is found (without use of steam) in 1782 
(fig. 393). It was used in England in the 1820's (fig. 394) for washing potatoes." 
What were the antecedents of these inventions? Scientifically designed 
apparatus, which use the circulation of steam and boiling water for cleaning, 
had appeared in France in the 'thirties. Significantly enough, they were not 
conceived for laundries, but for bleacheries of the textile industry, where yarn 
and fabrics were made ready for dyeing. 59 
An apparatus popular in his day is shown by the great French chemist Jean­
Baptiste Dumas, in the plates to his Trailk de chimie appliquee aux arts (Paris, 
90 
1847). Steam is formed in a boiler. This steam drives hot water through an 
ascensioo pipe into a double-bottomed vat where it scatters evenly over the 
fabrics. A valve opens and closes at regnlar intervals, alternately filling and 
emptying the vat (fig. 392). The pattern is almost identical with that of a 
coffee percolator." 
England's striking interest in washing machines during the last twenty years 
of the eighteenth century is conlined as in .France to the indus trial processing 
of textiles, with only an occasional 'Machine called a laundry for washing and 
92 
pressing apparel.' English interest in mechanical laundering rather weakened 
in the nineteenth century, while the American quest for a device to lighten the 
laundering burden of the housewife became ever stronger. 
811 
American Steam w-ashing Co., New York, Catalogue,l855, 'Description and philosophy of James T. 
King's Patent: Washing and Drying Apparatus, adapted for the use of families, Hotels, Public Institu­
tions, and large laundries.' 
s1 British Patent No.l331, 1 June 1732. 
88 Mechanic's Magazine, London, 1823-4,, vol. 1, p. 301. 
89 Even in the 1780's the Grande Eneyctopedie gives its detailed information on washing machines in 
the article 'Bleaching.' 
9
0 Planche 136. Duvoir's apparatus, invented in 1837. 
91 Rotating wash-drums are also constructed, but these are quite primitive apparatus used only for 
92 
rinsing. British Patent No.1269, 5 Dec. 1780. 
564 