also known from its monastic origin as the 'refectory table,' was long and nar~ 
row, the natural shape of the plank. Most ofteu it was set up for the meal and 
tnken down when the meal was over. The stone or wooden benches skirting 
the walls were fixed, while the table was mobile and drawn up to them. The 
Renaissance transformed these trestle tables into heavy display pieces of wood 
or marble, with richly treated supports, thus monumentalizing the simple, 
medieval type. 
During the fifteenth century, the tahle, approaching a squarer form, tended 
to become permanently united with its supports. The old characteristic of 
demountahility persisted in the new types - small tables on a single leg, which 
are assumed to have heen collapsible." Both tbe drop-leaf tables, already men足
tioned, and the extension tables, appearing in the sixteenth century, follow in 
the tradition of the movable type. 
Demountahility in tables and the collapsibility of the smaller type had their 
reason in medieval furniture's nomadic life. 'At a time when furniture followed 
its lord and master in all his peregrinations, it was only natural to make it as 
48 
uncumhersome as possible.' 
The demountability of the table, we believe, bas a further cause: the wish for 
free and unencumbered space. Large dining tables in tbe middle of the room 
were avoided so long as the need was felt to move within intact spatial sur足
roundings. 
The seventeenth century, especially in the north, was fond of heavy forms. 
In southern Germany and Switzerland, the great armoires, with their heavy 
profiles, are preserved in countless eighteenth-century examples. In the English 
mansion, there appeared long and ponderous tables, which transformed the 
medieval type intD a stable and monumental one. They have heavy under足
framing and bulbous legs, as if to confirm that after so much turmoil a time of 
stable economy is coming in. The heavy armoires occupied not living chambers, 
however, but the vaulted passages of the burgher house, and the oaken tables 
of the English nobility were in scale with the spacious balk 
In the new palaces of eighteenth-century monarchs, one looks in vain for 
tables to seat all those who partook of the banquets. When needed, tables were 
set up for the feast and moved (as in the Middle Ages) at the end of the meal. 
The term 'dining table,' Havard says, was unknown in France before the 
47 
'Tables resting on one foot with shaped ends suggested that they ma.y have been collapsible.' Ma.c足
quoid and Edwards, op.cit. vol. m. 
48 
Havard, op.cit. vol. IV, col. ll30. 
292 