295. '?\laster Room,' 
Pullman Company, 1939, 
Convertible room for day 
and nlghl use. Comfort 
equal to a two-room apart­
ment is achiencd by folding 
beds and a number of fold­
ing chairs, Comfort here is 
based on corwerfibilily, in 
contrast to Napoleon ll I's 
rigid room and fixillres, 
(Courtesy of the Pullman 
Company) 
acquainl cd the world wi t.h this masterpiece of French taste and French con­
struction. Camille Polonceau, the great engineer- still remembered for the 
iron roof construction bearing his name·~ constructed the train, connecting 
the cars by deftly contrived platforms. Violletrle-Due designed the interior 
with its studied ceiling decorations, its heavy hangings and carpels. As with 
Pullman's Pioneer, the dimensions of this train were wider and higher than the 
normal. The imperial train with its brilliantly polished lattices and wheels, 
with its wagon d'honnenr, its dining car, its splendrous sleeping car for the imperial 
couple, ils open, glassless observation car in the middle, kindled in every prince 
of Europe the desire to emulate Napoleon HI in this as in his transformation 
of Paris. 
Eight years later, in 1865, Pullman's sleeping car, the Pioneer, began to demo­
cratize aristocratic luxury. Pullman possessed the same instinct as Henry Ford 
half a century later, for stirring the dormant fancies of the public until they 
grew into demands. Both careers centered around the same problem: How 
might the instruments of comfoii,, that in Europe were unquestioningly reserved 
to the financially privileged classes, become democratized? 
Yet the word 'democratization' cannot here be used without reserve, for with 
Pullman's innovation America gave up its single-class system. In the 'forties 
and 'fifties European travelers repeatedly mentioned their differentiated travel 
classes, for which the Americans of that time had no use. 'There are no first 
and second-class carriages as with us; hut there is a gentlemen's car and a ladies' 
ear: the main distinction between which is that in the first, everybody smokes; 
am! in the second, nobody does. . . . The cars are like shabby omnibusses, but 
457 