back to the First Empire, we could not ascertain. A lineage striking us as plaus­
ible might rather attach the standard circular born£-- from whose cone shrul>s, 
vases, statues, lmnps, nmst ever sprout~ .. to the rnany-tiered flower stand 
(fig. 193) that Percier and Fontaine placed in mid-room around 1800. In his 
steel-engraved l'Art industriel (1842), Leon FeuchCre (1804-57), one of the 
anemic late-Romantic designers who greatly influenced ruling taste, shows a 
grande jardiniere entouree de divans (fig. 194). A ring of seats encircles the whole 
piece. Its plastic ambition has outstripped the amplitude of Percier and Fon­
taine's piece. During the borne's development in the 'eighties, when objects 
sprouted from the center, its palm trees, real and artificial, seem survivals of 
the flower stand·~ vestiges, like our vennifonn appendix, of an earlier function. 
More significant than its exact lineage is the inner kinship of this enormous 
circular seat of the 'eighties with the flower stand designed for the center of a 
Swedish salon by Percier and Fontaine. Both betray a weakening sense of 
space. 'Today [1878] people are so keen on these seats that a circular borne, 
2 metres in diameter often stands in a small middle-class drawing room 4 metres 
73 
long.' This period, driven by its horror of the void, fills the central space of 
a room, which the medieval and Baroque had always respected (figs. 212, 214). 
In the 'forties the central sofa became fashionable. In the hrilliant salon of 
the Due d'Orleans (18,13), this sort of double bed (without framework, naturally, 
74 
but with a rudimentary ann or back rest) held the middle of the room (Hg. 211). 
It enjoyed its greatest popularity during and after the Second Empire. These 
sofas spread rapidly, and soon appeared in the most unexpected settings. In 
1850 A. I. Downing, the well known Americ.an landscape gardener, whose career 
falls into the Hrst half of the century and who explicitly calls for good taste, ask­
ing that the country house be furnished 'with more chasteness and simplicity 
75 
than the town house,' recommends 'the octagonal ottoman.' 'Perhaps the 
most pleasant form is the octagonal ottoman stuffed seat placed in the middle 
76 
of a large room ... .' At its peak in the 'sixties, the central sofa is button­
pleated, covered in damask or cretonne (later in red plush, which becomes nearly 
standard), and has a frange royale hanging to the floor. Contemporary England 
favored this central piece in its various forms, but kept it more modest and 
clearer in outline. No fringes (fig. 213). Later these imposing sofas found their 
way into hotel lounges, art galleries, and waiting-rooms. In the private dwelling 
it was replaced toward 1900 by the corner sofa. 
n Deville, op.cit. p.43. 
4 
7 Jules Janin, Un Hiver a Paris, Paris, 1843, p.l4l. 
75 
A. I. Downing, The Architecture of Country Houses, New York, 1850, p.409. 
" !bid. p.427, 
375 