healed stones, the round or chest-shaped cauldrons, and the vanous levels 
within the bath chamber. 
Medieval bath customs varied but little throughout Europe. When David 
Urquhart campaigned to introduce the Turkish bath among the English, he 
learned, in 1856, that the Isle of Hathlin, on the Irish coast, still possessed medi­
eval sweating houses, and that 'especially at the Fair of the neighhourhood the 
22 
people get themselves bathed.' In Switzerland, in the Ziireher Oberland for 
instance, communal vapor baths remained in use even later. The abundant 
steam generated in breadmaking was often used for this purpose. Having 
introduced a tube into the oven, the company might bathe in the vapor so gen­
erously given off in the baking process. Conflicts arose from time to time between 
the hakers' guild and that of the bathmen, who resisted this injury to their trade. 
THE RUSSIAN VAPOB. BATH 
The Hussiau vapor bath is the most simple of regeneration types and has 
proved the most enduring. The pattern apparently goes back to eras and regions 
for which we have no historie,al evidence. It was connected with the myths of 
pre-Christian times, with the worship of the dead, with the cult of springs and 
rivers. On holy days, on Maundy Thursday, before Easter, one left an offering 
of meat, eggs, and milk, heated the bathhouse, scattered ashes on the floor, 
bidding 'Wasb-ye, spirits' to the beings that inhabite,d the place. For the 
furtherance of good health, herbs endowed with magical virtues were tied into 
the hath wisp." 
The origins of the vapor bath as practiced by the Hussians and the Finns are 
so remote as to have left none but the most meager clues. Simple analysis of 
the type seems to give more reliable guidance than the written sources. Like 
the baths of Antiquity and of Islam, the Hussian vapor bath is a social institu­
tion. But its t:ype suggests an earlier social structure, a milieu that did not 
depend on slave labor. One bather serves the other. No provincial simplifica­
tion, it is a type that, unlike the urban gymnasia and thermae, attained its 
common form in peasant surroundings and in wooded regions. 
We side with one of the few precise investigators of the question, who dis­
cards the easy assumption of Greco-Homan origin. 'I would rather suppose,' 
he says, 'that the idea of this type was derived from the Orient or from the 
24 
Scythians, who possessed such vapour baths ••• or perhaps from the Sar-
ll2 Descriptive Notice of the Rise and Progre.:~; of the Irtsh Graejenberg, St. Ann's Hill, Blarney, to Which 
is Added a Lecture .. . by the Proprietor, Dr. Barter, on the Improved Turkish Bath, London, !858, p.l5. 
2
a Felix Haase, VOlksglaube und Brmwhtum der Ostslaven, Breslau, 1939, pp.l37, 194, and 158. 
24 
Cf. Herodotus, rv, 73-5. 
646 