and lying. Convertible furniture and adjustable furniture developed simul­
taneously: initial attempts before 1850, strongest impulses in the 'sixties, 
'seventies, and 'eighties. 
In Europe this convertible furniture never found itaelf altogether at horne. 
The early nineteenth century, in continuation of an eighteenth century trend, 
paid it some attention, both in France and in England. As one writer observes: 
The [Paris] expositions of 1834, 1844 and even of 1849 ... stood out ... by their 
quantity of divan-beds, invalid's chairs, etc. . . . By patient study the inventors have 
indeed produced endless manners of containing a bed ready made up ... whether in the 
chest or in the swing-down backrest, or lastly by mechanical rnl:',ans of ascent and descent; 
and in addition, toilet utensils and clotht".s-drawers. It is nonetheless certain that for 
comfortable sleep a divan-bed is still not what one needs. . . . If of a bedroom you wish 
to make a drawing room, or of a drawing room you wish to make a bedroom, take a divan 
bed that has won prizes at every exhibition, supplement it with a bed-table-washstand, 
a wardrobe-desk, or easy chair-lounge . . . and you will easily become the protector of the 
3
inventors who are on such interesting terms with the fair commissions. 5 
These words were written in retrospect from the late 'seventies hy the author of 
a Dictionary of the Upholsterer, which aimed mainly at being a guide to the most 
decorative arrangements of drapery. The author voices the ruling taste of the 
period, hostile in basic outlook to the new types of furniture. English opinion 
of patent furniture was not very different." 
In America, it was quite otherwise. Furniture could not he allowed to take 
up room; there was a shortage of space in the dwellings of an expanding economy. 
America around 1850, in contrast to Europe, had but a thin stratum of well­
to-do who might set the fashion for the masses. Besides, a piece that combined 
two or more functions called for smaller outlay. All this encouraged the old 
American predilection for coupling the most dissimilar objects, such as the bowie 
37 
knife-pistol of 1837. 'The nature of my invention,' runs the patent specifica­
tion, 'consists in combining the pistol and Bowie knife, in such manner that it 
ean he nsed with as much ease and facility as either the pistol or knife could he 
if separate.' 
The Americans had h1nnor enough to make fun of the itch for combination 
38 
and its lapses into the grotesque. A 'comicality' of Harper's Weekly (1857)
imagines a traveling-case packed with pistols, dagger, hatchet, shoo-horn, loaf 
of bread, plates, and live hahy (fig. 266). 
5 
~ Jules Deville, Diclionnaire du tapissier. Critique et hislorique de rameublement fraTU}ais depuis les 
temps anciens jusqu'U nos jours, Paris, 1873-80, text-val., p.47. 
as John C. Loudon, An Encyclopedia of Collage-Farm and Villa Architecture and Furniture, new ed., 
London, 1836, in the chapter 'Furniture for Cottage Dwelling' mentions folding beds, hut only for the 
sake of completeness, with the reservation that such furniture was not needed in the English household. 
7 38 
3 U.S. Patent 254, 5 July 1837. P.544. 
424 