that would answer to the articulation of the human body. Looking through the 
magazines of the mid-nineteenth century, one is conlinually sUl'priscd at the 
insight and care spent on meeting physiological requirements. 'Comfort, con­
venience and adaptation to health,' we read in 1869, 'are the chief ends to he 
3 
secured in the construction of a seat.' In introducing a metal lounge destined 
to become one of the most popular models (fig. 256), 70 different positions were 
claimed; physiological considerations came first: 'Physiologists tell us that nearly 
three hundred muscles are directly or indirectly connected with motions of 
which the small of the hack is the pivotal center .... People of sedentary habits 
4 
are eonstantly complaining of the hack.' 
The railway scat, from the 'fifties onward, becomes the object of a searching 
experimentation, and the inventors take great pains to curve the back rest and 
seat organically. When a later inventor (1885) puts forward a new 'reversible 
car seat' he rests his argument on the fact that 'the portions of the body which 
require the most exertion to keep erect, when in sitting posture, are the neck and 
the loins. . . . In these the only bony supports consist of the cervieal and the 
5 
lumbar vertebrae ... .' And he shapes his seat (fig. 234) so that the neck and 
lumbar region shall be particularly cushioned by curves in the upholstery. To 
make clear his purpose, he illustrates his words with a diagram of a man seated 
in an ordinary chair, the point in the neck line that lacks support being marked 
with a circled x. A seeond diagram shows an English railway seat and the x 
indicates that the head can rest back. The patentee diagnoses the regular 
American railway seat's weakness by an x drawn in mirl-air. His own solution 
carries no x, for it snccessfnlly meets physiological needs by its specially traced 
proportions and curves. 
Sitting 
It is not hard to bring a chair's appearance np to date by a few superficial 
touches. Yet no greater complexity faces the furniture designer than to con­
struct a chair demanded by new habits of sitting. Each time, there israised a 
new problem of adjustment to the human body and to the posture emerging 
in a given period. The centuries of toilsome progress in seating from the Gothic 
to the Baroque show how inelastic is our imagination in this sphere. 
How does the nineteenth c-entury like to sit? 
We already know how its posture differs from earlier r,enturies. Sitting is an 
instance. Its chairs will aim at greater ease and fuller relaxation. But the ques­
tion that interests us is how this special type of ease and relaxation was attained. 
3 
Manufacturer and Builder, New York, 1869, vol. 1, p.9. 
4 
The Wilson Adjustable Chair Mfg. Co., 592 Broadway, New York, 1876, advertisement. 
0 
U.S. Patent 324,825, 25 Aug. 1885. 
400 