ening his list of manufactures. He built not only his own types but ctlso any­
thing connected with rolling stock. 
1'he Sleeping Car in Europe 
It is easy to understand that the democratic form of sleeping car had to be 
transplanted to Europe. The transplantation took place in England, as well 
as on the Continent, eight years after the Pioneer had first entered regular 
service. Pulhnan's shipment in 1873 of eighteen sleeping cars to the mother 
country of railroads shows how relatively early American influence was felt in 
this branch. 
The same year, another American entrepreneur ran the first sleeping cars 
over the Vienna-Munich route. The types used for this purpose are still current 
in the European service. Known as 'boudoir-trains,' they have their berths 
walled off into separate compartments. In contrast to the American berths, 
which run lengthwise, these are placed transversely. This arrangement comes 
from deeply rooted habits. In America, even in the nineteenth century, the 
rooms of a house flowed into one another and the doors were left open. In 
Europe a hedge surrounds the house, the rooms are as far as possible isolated 
from one another, and the doors arc kept carefully closed. The same custom 
is found in the preferential travel classes of Europe: Cars are subdivided into 
numerous small compartments. 
In Europe the sleeping car - and travel comfort in general- made but 
indifferent progress; it is still considered a luxury. In America the Pullman 
fare is set no higher than a night's stay in the average hotel. 
The Extension of Travel Comfort: Dining Car and Parlor Car 
In the late 'fifties, dining cars were for potentates only. Napoleon III and 
his imperial staff banqueted at a large central table, which was attended by 
liveried servants (fig. 296). 
The dining car began as an old baggage car into which had been moved a 
lunch counter, together with some high stools. 'The diner of 1862 was a baggage 
car ... and hare as to the interior except that it was furnished in the middle 
with an ohlong counter around the four sides of which the patrons ate while 
sitting on high stools. . . . From the inside of this ohlong the viands were served 
84 
by colored waiters in white jackets.' Pullman's touch changed the dining 
car as it had changed the sleeping car; he opened it to comfort. 
85 
When Pulhnan secured his dining-mr patents in 1869, he was not especially 
84 
Edward P. Mitchell, Memoirs of an Editor, New York, 1924, quoted in extenso in the Pullman News. 
vol. xm, no, 4 (Apr. 1935). 
so U.S. Patents 89,537 and 89,538, 27 Apr. 1869. 
463 