It has taken place on rising and descending planes and on various levels, like 
a switchhack railway. Now the endless chain takes over, imposing a uniform 
speed on its part of the process. Hanging on the conveyor, the carcass is opened 
at the chest and neck; the bead is all but severed; the lymph glands are inspected 
by a veterinary; condemned animals are switched onto a separate line. The 
stomach is opened; intestines are removed, the entrails inspected, the liver and 
heart cut out, the spine is split in twain; the internal and external surfaces are 
again cleansed; the meat is inspected a second time, and stamped; finally the 
carcass is slowly conveyed into the cooler. 
55 
The second stage, as we have already seen, is of significance from another 
standpoint. For it was through the whole method behind this process that the 
assembly line came about. In the packing industry, and in this particular phase, 
decades of assembly-line experience were gained. The automobile industry was 
able to work out its own assembly line with such astonishing speed because of 
the extensive practice gained here in working on the moving object. 
More directly than a technical description, Upton Sinclair in The Jnngle shows 
what happens in this phase; 
The carcass hog was then again strung up by machinery and sent upon another trolley 
ride; this tirp_e passing between two lines of men ... upon a raised platform, each doing 
a certain single thing to the carcass as it carne to him. One scraped the outside of a leg; 
another scraped the inside of the same leg. One with a swift stroke cut the throat .... 
Another made a slit down the body; a second opened the body wider; a third with a saw 
cut the breastbone; a fourth loosened the entrails; a fifth pulled them out .... There 
were men to scrape each side and men to scrape the back; there were men to clean the 
carcass inside, to trim it and wash it. Looking down this room one saw creeping slowly a 
line of dangling hogs ... and for every yard there was a man working as if a demon were 
after him. At the end of this hog's progress every inch of the carcass had been gone over 
56 
several times. 
Mechanization and Organic Substance 
In the key period from the late 'sixties to the late 'seventies, the apparatus 
for mass slaughtering was built up. The number of animals processed at the 
packing center of Chicago was still comparable to that of a European metropolis 
like Paris. Yet, fundamentally, all was completely different: In 1367 the popu­
lation of Paris with its suburbs was approaching the 2 million mark, while that 
of Chicago searcely numbered 220,000. Chicago conld not consume its quota. 
Even before the introduction of the refrigerator car, part of the Chicago produc­
tion was sent into foreign channels; fresh meat in various forms was exported 
to England and Scotland hy the late 'seventies. 
56 In the c.hapter As..'>emb1y Line. 
M Upton Sinclair, The Jungle, New York, 1906, pA2. 
229 