became as new and exciting as they had heen in Renaissance time. They took 
on a fresh vitality, as when an artist infuses with new plastic life objects that 
had become dnll and commonplace. 
This is no empty conjecture. Going through his hook on the mechanization 
of the milling process, The Young Millwright and Miller's Guide,' one finds that 
ahont half of it deals with the laws of 'Mechanics and Hydraulics.' The reader 
can follow ahnost step by step as the simple theorems, the 'Jaws of motion and 
force of falling bodies, of bodies on inclined planes, the laws of the screw and 
circular motion,' are transformed into mechanical devices, whence is composed 
the mill that rnns by itself, the mill without workers, the automaton. 
The paddles of the mill wheel, whose laws of motion under the influence of 
water Evans studied, are changed into baskets, into buckets on an endless belt, 
carrying products from a lower to a higher, or from a higher to a lower level. 
The water on the paddles of the overshot wheel is changed to grain, moving and 
moving ever onwards; but it does not drive, it is driven. 
Tbe difficulties which arose, leading ID quarrels and finally to a conflict with 
the Congress, carne from the millers. Aware of the advantages of the mecha­
nized mill, they did not wish to pay royalties to Oliver Evans, and later (1813) 
attacked the patent in a 'Memorial to Congress.' They asked for 'relief from 
10 
Oliver Evans' patent. Thomas Jefferson was 
the oppressive operations' of 
called in by an expert. His opinion of Oliver Evans' devices was low. He saw 
only the details, riot the thing as a whole. 'The elevator,' he declared, 'is noth­
ing more than the old Persian V\'heel of Egypt, and the conveyor is the same 
11 
thing as the screw of Archimedes.' 
If Oliver Evans' invention he split into its simple components, Jefferson is 
of course right. The chain of pots was nsed throughout the Ancient World -
12 
from Egypt to China- for raising water; and the endless Archimedean 
screw, the screw conveyor, is found in ahnost every late Renaissance hook deal­
ing with machinery. In the Renaissance it served as a means of 'screwing' 
water from a lower to a higher level. Thus Agostino Ramelli used a series of 
9 
The Young Millwright and Miller's Guide, Philadelphia, 1795, with an appendix on business manage­
ment by his partner Elincott, also translated into French, saw fifteen editions up to 1860. They have 
been carefully collated by Greville Bathe. The book was used as a standard work for more than half a 
century. 
10 G. Bathe, op.cit. pJl.l89-90. 
11 Ibid. p.91. 
Ill Recent studies have noted from a drawing of Pieter Breughel that the chain of pots 'were used in 
Holland as dredgers during the digging of a canal in 1561.' Zimmer, 'Early History of Conveying Ma­
chines,' in Transactiiins of the Newcomen Society (London, 1924-5), vol. 4, p.31. 
84 