Still of umneasured significance is nwchanization's intervention in the pro­
creation of plants and of animals. 
Mechanization Encounters Human Surroundings 
What happens to the human setting in the presence of mechanization? 
Dangerous tendencies declare themselves before the advent of mechanization 
(on which the whole blame is thrown) and independently of it. There is no 
doubt that nineteenth-century mechanization facilitated these trends. But 
they appear distinctly in the interior before the impact of mechanization is felt. 
The Changing Conception of Comfort: . .ll:fedieval Comfort 
We shall look to the late medieval period for a secure starting point. Here 
lie the roots of our existence and of our continuous development. Since typo­
logical researches in this field are unfortunately lacking, the Middle Ages will 
be included and dealt with from this point of view. What interests us in the 
first line here is the type of comfort developed in different periods. How did 
the Middle Ages understand comfort? How does the medieval conception differ 
from our contemporary view? Where do connecting links exist? 
To take a short path, we shall follow the relation between man and space. 
How does man order his intimate setting in the fifteenth century, the eighteenth, 
the nineteenth, the twentieth? How, in other words, has his feeling for space 
changed? 
A parallel question is that of human posture in the various periods, and of 
posture's projection into seating. 
Comfort in the Eighteenth Century 
The creation of modern sitting comfort is to he sought in the Hococo. The 
Hococo's great power of observation in shaping furniture organically so as to 
favor relaxation of the body forms a counterpart to that period's exploration 
of the plant and animal world. 
Late eighteenth-century England is primarily concerned with the technical 
virtuosity of the cabinetmaker, and affords, within the most refined type of 
handicraft, a foretaste of the mechanized furniture of the nineteenth century. 
7 