In one of the great scientific controversies of the century, the Jesuit Lazzaro 
Spallanzani, 1729-99, refutoo the theory that infrxsoria are spontaneously gen­
erated by vegetative force, 'substantial power,' or' occult virtue.' By obstinate 
experiment Spallanzani showed that bacteria enter nutritive solutions from the 
o•1tside. He wac interested in the generation of life, 'il gran problema della 
generatione,' fronl manllllaL-; and plants down to infusoria. 
How do microbes breed? By copulation, it was affirmed. Horace Benedict de 
Saussure, the Genevan geologist, 1740-99, first man to climb the Mont Blanc, 
discovered in 1770 that infusoria multiply by cleavage. Spallanzani proved 
this through one of his genially planned experiments, and portrayed for the 
first time (1776) lhe stages of their growth, maturation, and division (fig. 133). 
133. Mechanical Insem­
ination: Lazzaro Spallan­
zani, First Visual Rep­
resentation of the 
Partition of Infusoria. 
Lazzaro Spallanzani and 
the Geneva scientr.~is 
showed that microbes re­
produced by fmion, not 
by copulation. Scienllfio 
research into the creation 
of life dales from !his 
lime. Spallanzani trav­
ersed within a few years 
ihe cycle from one-cell 
organisms to the artificial 
imeminaiion of a bilch. 
(L. Spallanzani. Opus­
culi di Fisica Animali c 
Vegetabili. Modena 
1776, vol. 1) 
From this point to experiments with spermatozoa and artificial fertilization 
was but a step. Spallanzani proceeded by degrees in his studies of generation. 
He experimented with toads, frogs, newts, and even with silkworms; finally he 
succeeded in artificially fertilizing a bitch. 
The seed [Spallanzani reports] was injected into the matrix by means of a small syringe . 
. . . I had taken care to give the syringe the degree of heat which man and dogs are found 
to posse&':! .... The bitch brought forth three lively whelps, two male and one female .... 
Thus did I succeed in fecundating this quadruped; and I can truly say that I never re­
ceived greater pleasure upon any occasion since I cultivated experimental philosophy. I 
have no difficulty in believing that we shall be able to give birth to some large aaimals 
252 