THE WRITING TABLE 
The Renaissance, with its biSt for secular writing, took a strong interest in 
the writing table. The adjustable desk of the late Gothic monks, or the portable 
desk used even in 1499 by Polyphilo, now becomes the more ample secretary in 
two parts, the upper having all the drawers and doors for which there is room. 
This receptacle rests on a cousole -like the French buffets of the century­
or on another cabinet with doors. The upper and the lower sections are often 
of independent design, suggesting that at first the secretary was conceived as 
two-part furniture- as a chest upon a frame.' The fall-front, which gives 
access to its interior~ also serves as the writing surface. Soon the secretary is 
made in one piece, a type that endures through all stylistic changes well into the 
nineteenth century. 
rThe hurcau, having a fixed horizontal writing top ahove two or three narrow 
drawers, was an outgrowth of the monastic wall desk.' The consoles were later 
replaced by drawers often down to the floor.' This type, identical with that of 
today, is thought to have passed to France from Italy in the latter half of the 
seventeenth century.' The Rococo gave it a movable cylinder top. The secre­
tary was made with growing lavishness, so much so that Louis XV, whose own 
sumptuous pieces set no example, issued a prohibition against desks of solid 
5 
silver. The time is near when it will he adapted to bourgeois use, and the older 
form, the tall secretary, will be preferred. In the American patent furniture 
era, the cylinder-top type, the display piece of the late Rococo, will become 
serially manufactured office equipment. 
THE BUFFET 
The Burgundian dresser of the fifteenth century, with its shelves for display 
vessels, was a piece of social distinction, which migrated from the kitchen into 
the banquet hall. The oblong Italian credenza, having two or three doors 
beneath a number of narrow drawers, was without this upper section. It had 
entered from the sacristy, becoming a utility piece much favored in the spacious 
5 
mid-sixteenth century residences and palazzos of Italy. Around the middle of 
I Odom, William M., Ilislory of Italian Furniture, New York, 1918, vol. l, p.302. 'It is quite evident 
that the upper sections were made to be placed on tablets of independent design.' 
2 Examples from various periods of the sixteenth century will be found in ibid. voL 1, figs. 138, 306, 
307. 
sAn early form, closely fused with the wall like the monastic console writing desks of the sixteenth 
century, is: Schucbler's writing desk about 1730, with drawers down to the floor (fig. 239). 
4 Odom, op.cit. vol. 2, fig. 30. 
• Havard, Diclionnaire de l'ameublemenl et de la decoration depuis le XIIfw•e siCcle jusqu'U 1W$ jvurs. 
a Odom, op.cit. voJ. 1, p.144: an early example, of 1535. 
306 