George Mortimer Pullman (1831-97) began as a joiner in his brother's busi­
ness. He was not a wagonmaker by trade as were his two most important com­
66 
petitors. Organization, enterprise, rather than joinery, was his field. When 
the Erie Canal was widened, he transported houses from the old bank to the 
new, and when Chicago began to raise its houses several feet above the swampy 
ground, he found a similar outlet for his talent. His feat there, it seems, was, 
in 1855, raising a hotel bodily with its sidewalk while custom continued. Pull­
man was then 24. Toward the end of the 'fifties, the sleeping ear began to arouse 
general interest; in 1857, Theodore T. Woodruff, the leader in this field of inven­
tion, built his new sleeping cars and started them in operation. In 1858, Pull­
man purchased two old ca", which he remodeled as sleeping cars for $1,000 
apiece. Then the Civil War broke out. Pullman removed to Colorado and 
temporarily turned to miuing enterprise. By fumishing materials to the mines 
he realized $20,000 and returned to Chicago; he was 34 when he carried off the 
great coup. 
The 'sixties, on the European as well as on the American cnntinent, fostered 
a middle class growing in wealth and numbers. In Europe at this time arose 
the luxury hotels on the Lake of Lucerne and the Riviera; in America, the luxury 
sleeping car. Pulhnan's strength lay in his early recognition of this swelling 
demand for luxury. He staked his $20,000 on one card and in 1865 built the 
Piorwer (figs. 286, 287) at four times the cost of any other sleeping car. 
It seemed unbelievable at the time that so heavy an investment would ever 
)'ield a return. Besides, Pullman's sleeping car could not be used in normal 
traffic, as it was too wide for the bridges and fouled the platform roofs. How­
ever, things happened as Pullman foresaw: The bridges were widened, and the 
platform roofs were adjusted to the size of car he believed necessary for comfort, 
which has remained unaltered to this day. He was one of the first entrepreneurs 
to master the effective use of publicity. Just as in 1870 he was to invite American 
industrialists on his first continental crossing, he found in the unusual events of 
1865 a means of bringing celebrity to the Pioneer and of getting the platforms 
cut down to admit his cars. The luxury sleeping car Piorwer made its first journey 
as a hearse. It carried the body of Abraham Lincoln to its resting plae.e in his 
hon1e town. 
Pullman found no trouble persuading the public to pay $2.00 for a uight's 
journey, instead of the former $1.50. Once again he had guessed right. 'The 
66 
Theodore T. Woodruff, the leading inventor of convertible furniture for the sleeping car, and Webster 
Wagner (]817-82), who worked under Vanderbilt's patronage and is credited with the introduction of the 
drawing-room car and the invention of the oval car-roof. 