more than a century later. But the emotional climate then prevailing and the 
technical temper of the times followed entirely divergent paths. This explains 
why the new potentialities of the aineteentb century found no im1er contact 
with the objects whose structure they formed. Here in the sphere of comfort, 
the same phenomenon can be seen as later on in architecture, when stylistic 
fancies cloaked skeleton construction. 
The adoption of springs for non-technical purposes spread rather slowly. 
Even in 1851 it seems not to have been usual for easy chairs to be fitted with 
91 
coil springs. Early in the 'fifties the well-known architect Martin Gropius 
constructed elastic easy chairs in this way. The humorous Berlin paper .Klad­
deradatsch, made fun of it, in a page devoted to 'Latest Inventions,' showing 
bow a skeptical visitor was lifted to the ceiling for having tried to discover 
whether there were really twenty-four of these coil springs (fig. 226). 
92 
After a number of preliminaries (fig. 227), springs in the form of woven-wire 
mattresses were invented around 1870. 'The discovery was recently ruade that 
a long spiral spring of small wire, when interlocked in a certain way and put to 
a certain degree of tension, formed a [flexible] fabric of great strength and dura­
93 
bility' (fig. 228).
In the novelty of the find, quite understandably, the virtues of the mre mat­
tress were somewhat exaggerated:' ... strange as it may appear, it can be used 
as an excellent sleeping arrangement mth only a folded blanket above the wire. 
The surface of the mre ... mattress is in fact as sensitive as water, yielding to 
94 
every pressure and resmning its shape as soon as it is rmnoved.' 
When iron bedsteads were introduced around 1830, they were used in hospitals 
and prisons, not in the household. Now in the 'seventies the elastic mattress 
is used in the new means of transportation: ' ... intended for steamer berths, 
sleeping r.ars .•. for any place where a clean and cool sleeping arrangement is 
95 
desired.' 
A use for it was nevertheless seen in upholstered furniture: 'this device appears 
to be also destined to fill a place in the upholstery line, and already lounges, car­
seats, etc., are being made of it. The company " hopes before next summer to 
91 Martin Gropius (1821~80) ranks as one of the few distinguished architects of the third quarter of the 
nineteenth (~entury and was laU~r espedally noted for his functional hospital buildings and for his Berliner 
Kunstgewerbemuseum with its large glass~roofed inner court. He is the great-uncle of Walter Gropius. 
!I'J British Patent No.99, 12 Jan. 1865. 
9
3 The Manufacturer and Builder, vol. m, no. 5, May 1871, p.97. 
9
~ Ibirt. 
90 
Ibirt. 
96 
Woven Wire Mattress Company, Hartford, Connecticut, 
3M 