Linus Yale's Constructions 
The pin-tumbler cylinder lock invented hy Linus Yale, Jr., includes the 
following essential parts: 
First, the lock's closing mechanism- with the exception of his frrst patent 
of 1861 (ftg. 33) -consists of a set of five tumblers, an arrangement that has 
never since heen altered. The tmnhlers are called 'pin tmnblers' because they 
are extremely thin when compared to the parts normally used in lockmaking. 
They are thin steel hars or steel wires and, for reasons we shall see presently, 
are in two separate sections (figs. 33, 34, 35). 
Second, the case enelosing the lock as a whole-- a part later called the 'shell' 
or 'escutcheon' -is cylindrical and can he screwed into the door. It is a hollow 
cylinder incorporating along its length a rib through which run five vertical 
holes. The holes form chambers for the pin tumblers (ftg. 35). Yale himself, 
in his patent letter of 1865, describes the 'tmnhler-case' as having 'a cylindrical 
hore through it.' The boring is done eccentrically. 
Third, into this horing is fitted a smaller cylinder, later described as a 'plug.' 
This also has, in the words of Yale, 'holes hored through it in planes perpen­
20 
dicular to its axis.' The holes in the plug correspond with those in the rih 
of the fixed tumbler case and prolong them. In certain circmnstances, however, 
this semnd cylinder may revolve. Hence Yale's lock derived its technical name 
of 'cylinder lock,' distinguishing it from the lock mechanism in use since the 
fifteenth century. 
To smn up the elements of Yale's lock, we have: the fixed cylindrical lock 
case, or escutcheon; the smaller, eccentrically placed cylinder, or plug (hoth 
cylinders having mrresponding holes); and, fitting vertically into these holes, 
five round pins, each in two sections. (The upper section was later called the 
'driver,' and only the lower member retained the name of 'pin.') Constantly 
pressing the pin tmnhlers downward are five small spiral springs set into the 
uppermost part of the holes. 
Thus the pin chamber is partly in the lock case (fixed cylinder) and partly 
in the plug (movable smaller cylinder). The pin tmnhlers, under pressure from 
the springs, hold the lock case and plug together, just as nails running through 
two pieces of wood prevent them from sliding. In this position the plug is 
immovable. The mechanism is locked. 
To unlock this mechanism, a small flat key is inserted into a narrow slit in 
the plug. It passes under the downward-pressing pin tumblers and raises them 
2(1 Specification for Patent No. 48,475, 27 June 1865. 
64 