models were a means of making the worker motion-minded. They revealed the 
character of the individual's own work. The worker might compare the record 
of his motions to the wire models, and correct his inefficiencies. Moreover, the 
gestures captured in wire a life of their own. It is no accident that modern artists 
sOmetimes turn to the smne material in constructing their airy sculpture. 
What followed Gilbreth's Cyclograph was but an elaboration of the method. 
The principle remains unchanged. 
Frank B. Gilbreth investigated the forms of movement. It is not surprising 
that their trajectories became for him entities with independent laws. 
He began to study the similarities of human activities. He believed 'that the 
skill in trades and in all forms of athletics, and even in such professions as 
52 
surgery, is hased on one conrmon set of fundamental principles.' 
He made Cyclographs of champions in widely varying fields - champion 
fencers (fig. 19), champion bricklayers, expert pitchers, famous surgeons (fig. 51), 
and the champion oyster opener of Rhode Island -- to find 'the points of sim­
53 
ilarity between their motions.' 
The light curves and the wire models reveal the motion in full plasticity. 
Motion acquires a form of its own and a life of its own. For eyes trained by 
contemporary art, there is a direct emotional appeal in these shapes, which the 
eye does not find in nature. 
The light curves that visualize the movements of 'a girl folding a handker­
chief' (fig. 60), showing all the m;conscions intricacies, helong to that type of 
phenomena in which the motion means everything, the object performing it 
nothing. 
We have found no mention of Marey's work in Gilbreth's studies. But it 
matters little, for our purpose, whether Gilbreth had heard of it or not. Marcy 
had recorded trajectories on a single plate, and mentioned that a Geneva scientist 
used incandescent lamps for the same purpose. Gilbreth, with his Chronoey-
. . 
clograph, was the first to give us intimate insight into the pure path, as well 
as the time element, of a movement. 
52 
Frank B. and Lillian M. Gilbreth, Motion Study for the Handicapped, London, 1920, p.l5. 
~Ibid. p.l6. 'A prominent surgeon,' writes Gilbreth in connection with one of his experiments, 'is 
perfectly willing to be photographed perfonuing a delicate operation hilt when the fact is mentioned that 
this is being done to find the similarity between his adions and other skilled workers, he becomes scorn­
fully incredulous. How can such a thing be? He, a skillfully trained, highly developt->d product of long 
years of study to be likened to a bricklayer!' With the same cont,emptuous incredulity, a well-known 
physicist rejected the idea of a relation between the methods of prMent-day phyaics and the methods 
of contemporary art. 
104 