kitchen grows out of the organism of the house. This outlook led very early 
to an organization of the work process. 
In 1923 the Bauhaus at Weimar invited the public to a first view of its efforts 
in a display of work by masters and students, dramatic performances and festi­
vals. A one-family house, Das Uaus am Horn, was erected for this occasion." 
The Hans am Horn had a kitchen conceived as an L-shaped unit and designed 
with architectonic consistency (figs. 340). Its starting point was the storage 
center: A plain kitchen sink and sideboard were placed to the long wall, the 
sideboard heing alread·y split up intn two elements, the base mbinet and the 
wall cabinet. The window space is fully utilized, recalling the American Crafts­
man kitchens around 1910. A broad working surface runs heneath the swing 
window and flush with this extends the top of the gas range, extended in turn 
by a surface such as was to appear on American ranges in the early 'thirties, 
What strikes one looking at this, perhaps the earliest example of the kitchen 
in which organization is joined to form, is the close co-ordination of the storage, 
the cleaning-preparation, and the cooking centers, favored by surfaces and 
appliances at equal heights. Neither should one overlook the free-hanging wall 
cabinets that turn the corners, 
Germany in the 'twenties enjoyed a woefully hrief time of cultural creative­
ness. Talent from everywhere was attracted and put to work. In architecture, 
too, Germany proved hospitable to the new movement. From 1919 on, in keep­
ing with the Dutch example, housing projects went up for the working and middle 
classes. At Frankfurt in the large-scale housing development headed hy Ernst 
May in the later 'twenties, Dutch, Swiss, and Austrian architects were called 
in to assist and speed the development. 
Good will toward the new movement was nowhere better expressed than when 
the German Workhund decided on its settlement at W eissenhof, near Stuttgart, 
and Mies van der Rohc called upon young foreign architects to build by the 
side of their German colleagues, Among these was the Dutchman J, J, P, Oud, 
who will long he remembered as the first to regard workers' dwellings as an artistic 
concern, a prohlem tn he met not hy columns and ornament, but by a carefully 
worked-out plan providing low-cost rooms with dignity and a maximum of 
comfort (1919). Oud built a row of houses at the Weissenhof settlement, and 
there were crested the kitchens that, despite their simplicity, found the solution 
1,aken for granted today (fig. 341). At first glance the elementary hoards and 
planks suggest few links with the chrornium plate, the shining enamel, and 
highly mechanized kitchen of 1940. Yet in their organization they already held 
2
• Adolf Meyer, Ein Versuchshaus des Bauhauses in Weimar (Bauhausbiicher ff3 hersg. von W. Gropius 
und L. Moholy-Nagy, Mlinchen, 1924, pp.52-3, 
523 