and the countless attempts to create " truly nineteenth-century comfort went 
to waste. This happened at a time when Europe was beginning to realize into 
what plight it had been drawn by tbe ruling taste. 
Possibly the concentration of financial power into fewer bands- 1893 is a 
noteworthy date- decreased the small inventor's chances. Decisive, however, 
was the taste that possessed the country as a whole, the broad ma'lSes of the 
people. The year 1893 also marks a rift in the proud and independent sky­
scraper construction of the Chicago School, a break that after four decades is 
only beginning slowly to heal. 
An Approach to the Furniture of the Nineteenth Century 
The furniture of lhe nineteenth century is difficult of approach. Not for lack 
of material, which abounds at every turn. Tbe difficulty lies rather in the psy­
chological domain. We have not simply to judge the furniture of the period 
according to what it elaims to be. We have first to resolve a seeming paradox. 
Tbe furniture of the ruling taste assumes to liberate a wealth of feeling and 
fantasy. But its pieces were not created in the most direct way. They were 
reflectively created. It is thus that we may understand the recurrent imitation 
of styles. T. S. Eliot calls the poets of the Victorian taste 'reflective.' 'They 
think, but they do not feel their thoughts as immediately as the odour of a rose.' 
No less than the poetry of the ruling taste, intimate surroundings were created 
the leap into the unknown, tbe inventive. A powerful 
reflectively. Lacking was 
side of tbe nineteenth century is here revealed: the mask-like. Its view of real 
life is as deceptive as that of a wax museum. 
Over and against this, stands patent furniture. Here there is no room for 
reflection. All derivative feeling bas fallen away as the skin from a skeleton. 
Sometimes patent furniture strikes the grotesque: often it is congenial and 
startlingly direct. In this furniture, whose sole aim is to serve needs previously 
without claim or witbont solution, and whose construction rules out everything 
but bare formulation and inventive fantasy, the creative urge succeeds in pierc­
ing through. 
This would suggest that the paradox is inherent in the century. 
We can aim here only at a survey, not a detailed knowledge, of the true furni­
ture of the nineteenth century. To catalogue patent specifications and examples 
would scarcely further historical understanding. It would leave us hopel•ssly 
stranded in the technical. Purely fonnal and stylistic enquiry, on the other 
hand, glances off the surface. 
To understand its true nature we must choose another approach. As Brancusi, 
the sculptor, once said, stroking the marble planes of his 'Fish' in his studio iu 
394 