Most of the women who voted cherished the idea of owning an automatic washing 
machine. This vote of approval is five times as high as for either spinner or wringer types. 
However, unless the price gap between automatics and other styles is narrowed, spirits 
107 
may be considerably dashed when the price tag is cxamincd.
The Mechanization of Cleaning: Ironing 
The problem was raised from mid-century on: How can one do away with 
re-heating the flat-iron every ten minutes? It is no pleasant task to heat a 
piece of metal repeatedly in the fire until it glows, before traru;ferring it to the 
hollow iron, or to array a battery of heavy irons with their hottums to the stove. 
How can the cooling he delayed? How can ironing be made a continuous 
process? 
The answer is clear: only hy a continuous heat source within the iron itself. 
In the 'fifties gas was the only continuous heat source available. In the experi­
mentation with other heat sources at least one suggestion hard to take seriously 
was that of the iron 'fastened by a tnhe to a tea kettle and heated ... 
108 
by steam.' 
An advertising leaflet in the Edison Institute, Dearborn, shows how the early 
'fifties attempted to use gas as a constant heat source. A gutta percha tube 
directly connected this 'gas-iron' to the outlet in the ceiling (fig. 397). 
We need not judge here the advisability of using a gas tnbe in the manner 
of an electric cord. What is striking is the directness with which the problem 
was tackled: 'Ironing Simplified and Systematized.' For, it was now proclaimed, 
'the process of ironing can he continued unceasingly.' 
When it is recalled that the gas range was not intrnduced until after 1880, 
the earliness of this attempt to do hy gas what electricity alone could achieve 
is apparent. The gas iron is here portrayed in ahnost the same inviting words 
as, in our century, the electric iron: 'Pleasant- the oppressive heat of a stove 
is dispensed with; convenient- for the iron may be used in any room or chamber 
where there is gas.' 
In 1906, when the Westinghouse Company felt that a series of newspaper 
advertisements was called for to familiarize the public with the advantages of 
the electric iron, it particularly stressed the point that the housewife may now 
do her ironing in the open air on the veranda. And it did not seem superfluous 
to remind the husband of what it means to stand hy a hot range on a summer's 
7 
1° Mary Davis Gillies, What Women wanl in their Kitchens of Tonwrrow, a report on the Kitchen of 
Tonwrrow Contest conducted by McCall's Magazine, New York, 194.4, p.l55. 
1os Swisher, op.cit. p.32. 
571 