Q. 3. To what extant did the mass production reduce the price of the built-in 
bathtub? 
A. So far as we can determine from our past price schedules on built-in bath 
tubs, the price from !9!8 to 1944 bas been reduced about 20%. 
Q. 4. What is the proportion of the production of the recess-type to the produc­
tion of the corner-style type and of the leg type? 
A. The 5' 0" recess double shell tub is by far the largest seller. It is approxi­
mately 75% of the market. The corner-style douhle shell tub has only a 
small sale and is used in unusual bathrooms which are larger than the con­
ventional bathroom in homes, thus requiring a corner pattern tub instead 
of the recess type. At the present time, the leg-type tub popularity has 
dwindled until now it is about 25% of the overall bathtub sale. 
Q. 5. Among the more expensive types, has the recess-bathtub or the corner 
bathtub been preferred? 
A. The 5' O" recess double shell tub is by far the most popular and preferred 
bathtuh; possibly for two reasons- one, lower cost, and two, it permits a 
smaller-sized bathroom. As I have indicated above, the corner-type tub is 
only used in larger-sized bathrooms. 
Q. 6. Did you reduce bathtubs to a few standard sizes? Which size is the pre­
ferred one? 
A. The recess type double shell tub has four standard sizes; namely, 
4'6" 5'0" 6'0" 
5' 6" 
By far the greatest sale and popularity is the 5' 0'' size, in fact the 4' 6'' 
and the 6' 0" size are uacd very occasionally, while possibly IO% of the 
business is 5' 6" size. 
Q. 7. Do you think that the size of the built-in bathtub is largely responsible for 
the size of the present-day bathroom? 
A. Without question, the universal acceptance of the 5' 0" recess double­
shell tub has largely been responsible for the size and shape of present-day 
bathrooms. Over a period of years of experience with huilders and arehi­
tects, as well as home owners, we have found that the 5' 0" tub is averagely 
an adequate size bathtub for the average size person. The 4' 6" tub is 
used in extremely small rooms, while the 5' 6" and 6' 0" tubs are used hy 
home owners that are of exceptional size and desire a larger size bathtuh 
than the conventional 5' 0". 
Q. 8. Which types of bathrooms are most prevalent in apartment houses and 
hotels? The type shown in my sketch or others? 
Q. 9. 'Which types of bathrooms are most prevalent in private homes? 
A. The most typical bathroom layout used in homes, apartment houses, and 
hotels at the present time is the regular 5' 0" recess tub with the lavatory 
and water closet and tub fittings all along one wall, thereby simplifying the 
roughing-in or the supply and waste piping in the wall. We attach a sheet 
indicating various types of bathroom layouts that have been used by archi­
tects and builders rather freely over tbe period of the last 15 or 20 years. 
704 