almost everything that industry was later to put out in more luxurious versions. 
Beneath the ample windows the storage center consists of a plain food chest 
ventilated from the courtyard, over which the working surfaces run. Oud 
treated the food chest as Catherine Beecher had arranged the flour barrel in 
1869. The cleaning and preparation center consisted of smooth working surfaces 
and a plain sink-instead of the 'electric sink' advocated around 1940. A 
huilt-in refuse can is serviced. from the court. At a right angle is the cooking 
center, which directly communicates with the dining room through a hatch. 
The year before, 1926, a hook had appeared in Germany hearing a title not 
unlike Christine Frederick's hook of 1915. The New Household, A Guide to 
24 
Scientifw Housekeeping proved most timely and was read by architects, manu­
facturers, and housewives. Unlike the American literature of its kind around 
1910, this work did not draw its immediate inspiration from scientific manage­
ment. Germany too lacked the long American tradition that viewed house­
keeping as a profession, and for that very re.ason Dr. Erna Meyer's hook stirred 
the pnblic. Within a year it went through thirty printings, and ultimately forty. 
The American reader would he taken aback by the primitive devices it so eagerly 
preserihes for the lightening of household drudgery. 
The authoress had discussed with Oud the organization of the work process, 
and to him the hook owes its clear and formal simplieity. It shows that even 
when he takes the kitchen board in hand, the true artist may apprehend and 
trace the lines of a future development. 
J. J.P. Oud was not ulone. Mies van der Rohe, Walter Gropius, Josef Frank's 
electric kitchen, and LeCorhusier's long tiled working surfaces all show the 
25 
same decision to deal with the kitchen as a unit. The Weissenhof settlement 
not only gave the signal for the spreading of the new architecture and to some 
extent of the constituent furniture of our century, hut it also solved the organiza­
tion of the kitchen." The trend was rapidly taken up all over the Continent." 
By 1930 it had won acceptance. 
In the mid-'thirties America took the lead. Meanwhile all the machinery 
hasic to kitchen mechanization had heen evolved. It was to fmd room in the 
24 Dr. Ema Meyer, Der Neue llaushali, Ein Wegweiser zur Wissenschafllichen Hausfaehrung, Stutt­
gart, 1926. 
25 
Werner Graef, 'Innenraeume,' Hersg. im Auflrage des Deulschen Werkbunds, Stuttgart, 1923, 
Kuecben, figs. 164-76. S. Giedion, 'La CitC-Jardin du Weissenhof U Stuttgart,' L'Architeclure vivanle, 
Prlntemps-Cte, 1928. 
26 Tben began the standardizing of the kitchen and the tendency to compress it to the extreme, as at 
the Berlin Exhibition of 1929, Die Neue Kueche. 
21 For Sweden, cf. 0. A.Imquist, 'Koekets Standardisering nagra synpunkter vid pagaende utrednings~ 
arbete,' in Byggmaeslaren, heft 9, 1927. For Switzerland, cf. Gewerbemu:seum, Basel, Ausstellung, 'Die 
Praktische Ki.iche,' Feb.-Mar. 1930. 
526 