commissions, Hardwood House, 1770-75, built a case iu which the steps folded 
away.22 
Benjamin Franklin solved the same problem in his own manner by placing 
the underside of the seat of his fauteuil, which would turn 
the stepladder on 
out on hinges (fig, 181), For the upper shelves, as is known, he had a forceps 
at the end of a pole, whicb he would gladly demonstmte to visitors, Sheraton 
concealed his ladder in a table (fig, 180), 
The Dining Room 
The dining room too, as it became separate, was provided with special furni­
ture: chairs, draw-leaf tables, buffets, 
The chairs of the great cabinetmakers are known in every detail of their legs, 
seats, and heart-shaped or interlaced backs, They are graceful, but no more, 
Their constituent content is not in proportion to the esteem in which they are 
held, These chairs were mainly designed for parlor purposes, 
More interesting are the English sideboards of the late part of the century 
(fig, 183), Their light, frequently curved body is raised on slender legs, Robert 
Adam gave them heavy sidepieces, pedestals capped by urns (a motive to be 
found in every English garden) to hold cutlery; but these soon disappeared and 
there remained the light and elegant form, whence a line leads to William Morris 
(fig, 182), 
As we have seen, dining tabll'S were at first called by the French tables ii l' an­
gtaise, Great care was used to give them skilful mechanism, em.uring lightness 
of aspect and yet the faculty of drawing out to ahnost unbelievable lengths, 
23 
Even horseshoe-shaped dining tables were made to be ext<Jnsible (1788),
The Rediscovery of Cleanliness 
Cautiously, the late eighteenth century discovers that cleanliness and hygiene 
have a place in life, The interest is there and leads to the most interesting furni­
ture of the time, Sheraton designs a variety of simple washstands to fill corners 
or to stand against the wall, 
24 
Free-standing washstands, as preferred in France (lavabo), were also used,
25 
Shearer elabomtely equips the dressing stand of a gentleman (1788) with 
21 lllustrated in Oliver Brackett, Tlwmas Chippendak, London, 1924, p.277. 
u Cabinet Maker's /...Qndon Book of Prices, London, 1788, compiled by Thomas Shearer, pl. 19, fig. 2. 
:u In the Empire they were pompously disguised as antique tripods. Cf. Havard, op.cit. vol. m, p.271, 
'Lavabo: petit meuble en vogue pendant le consulat ct l'Empire ... jusqu'U Ia fin de Ia restauration on 
continue d'en faire usage.' In the 'thirties the English turned to broad washstands with marble tops 
(fig. 187), 
:u. London Book of Prices, op.cit. pl. 9. 
324 