33. LINUS YALE, JR.: First Pin­
tumbler Cylinder Lock. Patented 
1861. The basic ideas o.f the pin­
tumbler cylinder lock are fully 
developed in the first patent: tumblers 
a.ligned one behind another in a s!:nyle 
row; and lock divided info a fixed 
cylindrical lock-case (escutcheon) and 
a smaller, eccentrically placed cylin­
pin chambers are 
der (plug). The 
formed by corresponding holes in lhe 
lock case and in the pl-ug. To align 
the tumblers, however, Yale still uRes 
a round key inserted groove downward 
in the lraditio7Ull way. (U.S. Patent, 
29 January 1861) 
error,'" and after some trials he opened one parautoptic lock after another with 
ease. 'Tbe method for picking the best parautoptic lock,' so he assures, 'is so 
exceedingly simple that any smart lad mn make a wooden key which will open 
13 
these locks and re-lock them again.' Yale's own booklet gives many accounts 
by different bankers showing how Yale proceeded. One of these affords some 
insight into the situation: A New York banker, whose Day & Newell lock­
popularly mlled Hobbs's lock- had been picked, writes on 12 January 1856: 
Mr. Yale picked my ten-tumbler lock, the finest of its kind, for which 1 paid three 
hundred dollars ... he cut a wooden key solely from inspection of the lock through the 
key-hole, which turned the bolt back as readily as my key would have done. And then, 
to complete my discomfiture, he cut away one hit of his wooden key and locked it so that 
I <:>,auld never have un-locked it with my own key.I4 
In 1851, the year Mr. Hobbs carried off his greatest success by opening the 
famous bank locks of England, Linus Yale constructed a bank lock to which 
be gave a new name: the 'Infallible Bank Lock' or the 'Magic Lock.' Indeed, 
one cannot deny that there was something magical about it. 
The key for this lock, in contrast to the complicated winged keys, was ex­
tremely simple. At first glance it looked rather like a clock winder or a sardine­
can opener (fig. 32). It consisted of a round shank terminating in a smaller, 
n A Dissertation on Locks and Lock-picking and the principles of burglar proofing showing the ad van~ 
tages attending the use of the magic infallible bank lock ... invented by Linus Yale, Jr., Philadelphia, 
1856. 
1a Ibid. p.I6. 
14 
Ibid. 
60 