mesh ran the whole length of the baking ehamlwr. At either cud, outside of the 
oven, the belt ran around large cast-iron rollers, which kept it continually 
movmg. 
Coffin's independence of the conventional solutions was quite in keeping with 
his temperament, Even when court-martialed for disobedience and contempt, 
he stood fast in refusing to keep inadequately trained officers on his ship. Coffin 
was horn in Boston, Massachusetts, the son of a customs officer. It would he 
misleading to call this British officer an American; but we may note that he 
spent his youth in Boston, 
Admiral Coffin's proposal of 1810 differs from the long series of patents 
between 1850 and 1360 in one resped: all the mid-century patents place the 
endless belt entirely within the baking chamber, so as to prevent loss of heat. 
24 
The first proposal of this sort, made by a Philadelphia inventor, claims to he 
the first time an endless-chain platform was combined with a baking oven 
(figs. 100, 102), Historically speaking, this is certainly not true, but what was 
new and of future promise was the idea of placing the conve) or within the baking 
chamber. All successors adopted this feature. Proposal follows proposal for 
raising production; the belts are multiplied; soon attempts are made with upright 
chains, the bre"'d's heing baked during its short vertical transit through the 
baking chamher. 
Around 1360, the problem of the bake oven seems to have stimulated such 
out.,tanding engineers as William Sellers, the machine-tool builder." William 
Sellers' organization of the interior of the oven, his arrangement of the vertical 
endless chains so that 'they shall nearly balance each other, to make the recep足
tion and discharge of the material automatic,'" as well as his mode of heat re.gula足
tion, all reveal the expert engineer. 
At the time these automatic ovens came into being, Boston, Chicago, New 
York, and especially Philadelphia had mechanical bakeries using ovens, some足
times several store)'S high, fed by an endless belt. Some of these were successful, 
otherE ill fated, either burning down or, when they failed to pay their wa)', 
passing from hand to hand, But successful or otherwise, they were on the whole 
show pieces. Small bakers were the rule, and, much longer than the European, 
American housewives continued to make their bread at home. 
M H. Ball, Bake Oven, U.S. Patent 7778, 19 Nov. 1850. 
u William Sellers (1824-1905) of Philadelphia belongs to the early generation of American industrial足
ists, in which the manufacturer and inventor were combined in one person. He was active in many fields, 
from tool making to bridge building and skyscraper construction, As president of the Midvale Steel Co,, 
he was Frederick Winslow Taylor's chief; it was he who enabled Taylor to develop his system in Midvale 
Steel. 
,. W. Sellers, Improvement in Ovens, U.S. Patent 31192, 22 Jan. 1861. 
177 