perhaps, in this connection, is a 'very simplo and useful portable kitchen fur­
nace' with Rumford's sunken stewpan, around which the combustion gases 
may pass (fig. 354). The conically tapered fire chan1ber is suspended like a 
bird's nest. This confining of the heat, as well as the suspension allowing ready 
access of air, laid down the pattern for the rational range of a later time. 
He painstakingly argues to the public the advantages of the roasting oven 
in even radiation and greater juiciness of the meat, and proposes roasting ovens 
made of 'a hollow cylinder of sheet iron, closed at one end and set in brickwork, 
40 
so that the flame of a small fire may play directly beneath' (fig. 352). 
He pays special care to the design of the cooking vessels to he placed on a 
mmpact heat source. And here we see the iron adapter rings later nsed to 
make the range take pans of varying size. The utilization of stean1 for cooking 
and the economy of heat by stacked pans are outlined in strikingly adequate 
constructions. The sides of the steam dish are double 'for the purpose of eon­
fining the heat more effectually.' There is even an elegant proposal for a self­
mntained kitchenette shut off by doors, which he recesses, cupboard-like, into 
41 
the wall. Rumford calls it a' concealed kitchen.' Humford often moves along 
paths that were not later traveled. But, he points out, his suggestions, althongh 
based on wide practice, are tentative. He is delving into an unknown sphere, 
and as a creative scientist he often anticipates things later to he laboriously 
wrested from the trial and error of everyday experience. 
The successive American improvements of the cast-iron range were largely 
elaborations of the Pennsylvania Dutch oven. Over three decades passed before 
the stove of east-iron plates entered upon its expansion. It was given a special 
grate such as had long been usual in fireplaces. An ash chest was added, and 
42 
on one side a roasting oven heated above and below by the mmbustion gases 
(fig. 353). 
The third name directly linked with the shaping of the range is that of the 
man who comes closest to the description of a stovemaker, for he later engaged 
in their manufacture. He was Philo Penfield Stewart (1793-1363), who began 
as a missionary and teacher, riding two thousand miles on horseback to preach 
before an Indian tribe. He was instrumental in the founding of Oberlin College, 
and possessed the inventive gift, as widespread in the America of his day as 
the gift of painting in the Renaissance. Philo Stewart hoped to mmbine st11dy 
in his mllege 'with such economy that the students may defray all their expenses.' 
The school opened in 1333, and the next year Stewart took out a patent for a 
41 
40 Ibid. vol. 3, p.257. Ibid. vol. m. pp.46o-67. 
u For particulars of this development, see William J. Keep, 'Early American Cooking Stoves,' Old 
Time New England, vol. xxn, Oct. 1931, which includes a list of the American patents down to 1836. 
533 