personality. Here the main lines were traced by Catherine Esther Beecher 
(1800-1873). Like so many reformers, Catherine Beecher came from a New 
England minister's family. She approached tbe household as Emerson bis 
Essays, or their contemporary Sylvester Graham the art of breadmaking. 
Housekeeping for her was not an isolated problem, but one that grew out of 
the feminine question as a whole. The generation born around 1800 came to 
its tasks with something of tbat eighteenth-century universalism which often 
lasted into the first half of the nineteenth. 
In 1841 Catherine Beecher published a Treatise on Domestic Economy. Although 
intended as a 'text-book for fenmle schools,' it n1et with extraordinary success. 
The work does not start with cooking recipes. It opens witb a chapter on 'The 
Peculiar Responsibilities of the American Woman.' 
She raises her questions in the very preface: 'In what respects are women 
subordinate? Wherein are they superior and equal in influence?' This woman, 
who at the age of twenty-one alrelldy taught domestic economy in an institu­
tion of her own founding, blamed ber sex's many disappointments on tbe fact 
that 'won1en are not trained for their profession.' 
Her Domestic Economy carefully weighs the problems faeing the women of 
1840. Before coming to her subject, she could not help discussing human physi­
ology. Without such an understanding, it seemed tu her, practical rules were 
bound to be mere patc:;hwork. 
She treated in detail practical household tasks- bow to cook, wash, clean, 
how to furnish tbe home, or choose vegetables and trees for tbe garden. As for 
kitchen recipes, there were none. They were published later, separately. Her 
every word shows that efficient housekeeping was not an end in itself. It was 
hut an instrument to be properly mastered; and above all it was the medium 
through which she hoped to guide American women to their responsibilities. 
In a speech to American women in the 1840's, Catherine Beecher pointed to 
the 'evils suffered by American women and American children.' ' She dealt 
witb the female lot among all classes of society. She told of '10,000 women in 
New York living by needle work, wbo by working twelve to fourteen hours 
can earn only twelve-and-half cents.' She has seen a 'New York office opened 
to aid domestics in finding places' where in 'a large room so crowded that she 
could think of nothing but a slave market,' servants were selected like chickens 
on a counter. She investigated living conditions among the workers at the 
Lowell textile mills (regarded as a model factory settlement in her time) and 
differed in ber conelusions from Charles Dickens, who had visited them some 
3 
The Education of the Rising Generation, Address to the Women of Cincinnati, 1846. 
514 