burners was placed at fixed intervals above and below the hearth plate through­
out the length of the oven. 
Finally, in the 'twenties, high pressure stearo was used, which circulated 
29 
through a series of tubes around the hem-th. It seems that gas explosions led 
to this measure, yet it should not be forgotten that this most recent device 
renews the principle which Angier March Perkins in 1351 modestly claimed as 
his: exact control of the baking temperature by direct radiation from steam pipes. 
The heavy brick walls now disappear in favor of insulated steel plates, which 
allow more accurate regulation of temperature, greater flexibility, and a reduc­
tion of the heating time to one quarter; and electric lighting is installed in the 
baking chamber. 
The Mechanization of Bread Making 
Thus far we have been dealing with individual phases in the process of bread 
manufacture. So long as an uninterrnpted production line was lacking, mass 
production remained impossible. 
30 
The first assembly line carne into beiug, as we recall, in an English 'victual­
ling office,' when the various machines for making ships' biscuits were inter­
related. This was in 1333, just a half century after Oliver Evans had devised 
his mechanical mill. In this royal victualling office, the amounts of flour and 
water flowing into the mixer, as well as the rolling of the dough, were automati­
cally regulated (fig. 46). 'Heavy cast iron rollers ... run alternately with great 
rapidity from one end of a table to the other ry means of a beam connected 
31 
with the steam-engine below.' These heavy rollers were inspired by the 
Castilian braga, French writers say. 'Wnen this operation is finished, the dough 
is conveyed on rollers to a second table' -where it is divided into pieces -
'and finally, still runuing on friction tables, to the machine which at the same 
32 
moment cuts and stamps the biscuits.' 
Thus the three main phases of modern mass production-mixing, rolling, and 
molding- were at once mechanized, and connected in a single production line. 
The nufermented dough of flat ships' biscuit is of far simpler structure than the 
sensitive dough of bread. But it was not long before bread too was being turned 
out in continuous manufacture and even in mass production. The French had 
such establishments successfully operating as early as the 1340's. The machine 
29 V. C. Kylherg, 'Baking for Profit,' The Northwestern Miller and American Baker, 6 Oct. 193i, Minne-
apolis. 
3
° Cf. p. 89£. 
81 Barlow, op.cit. p.803. 
m Rollet, op.cit. 
179 