in conveyance. The principle given by Henry Ford in My Life and Work (1922), 
to 'place the tools and the man in sequence of operations,' was here followed to 
a surprising degree. 
It was a sort of model workshop, for which almost everything was newly 
constructed. Nearly every machine was a patent. What improvements were 
made in the various machine tools are still accurately recorded in Bodmer's 
patent drawings." Normally a patent runs to only a few pages, here one speci­
fication fills fifty-six pages, ahnost a mechanical catalogue: 'Tools, or Apparatus 
for Cutting, Planing, Drilling and Rolling Metal' and 'novel arrangements and 
24 
construction of the various nlechanisnlS.' 
Between 1330 and 1350 England was hard at work perfecting these machine 
tools. It was on this basis that the intensive industrialization proceeded in most 
branches between 1350 and 1390. What interests us in this connection is how 
far around 1330 the construction and disposition of machine tools, and means 
of conveyance was aimed at a urtified production line. 
In construction: 'the large lathes being provided overhead with small travelling 
cranes fitted with pulley blocks for the purpose of enabling the workmen more 
economically and conveniently to set the articles to be operated on in the lathes and 
to remove them after being finished.' 
'Small cranes were also erected in sufficient number within easy reach of the 
planing machines.' 
In disposition: 'Gradually nearly all of these tools were constructed and were 
systematically arranged in rows, according to a carefully arranged plan.' 
In conveyance: 'Several lines of rails traversed the shop from end to end for 
the easy conveyance on trucks of the parts of machinery to I>e operated upon. 
Such arrangements were not common in those days [1339] whatever may be 
25 
the case now [1363].' 
In the first half of the nineteenth century and especially between 1330 and 
1350, inventive minds appeared everywhere, measuring themselves against the 
most diverse problems of industry. Extreme specialization~ except in the highly 
developed spinning machines ~ was far off. The times still offered the fresh­
ness of unfulfilled tasks. Bodmer was one of these versatile inventors; he worked 
on water wheels, steam engines, locomotives, machine tools, spinning n1achines; 
2s British Patent No. 80i0, A.D. 1839- British Patent No. 8912, A.D. 1841. 
24 British Patent No. 8070, A.D. 1839, p.2. 
:1$ The best picture is given by the untouched contemporary account, Institution of Ci-vil Engineers' 
memoir on Bodmer, op.cit. p.588. 
91 