THE ASSEMBLY LINE AND SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT 
THE assembly line ' is one of mechanization's most effective tools. It aims at an 
uninterrupted production process. This is achieved by organizing and integrating 
the various operations. Its ultimate goal is to mold the manufactory into a single 
tool wherein all the phases of production, all the machines, become one great unit. 
The time factor plays an important part; for the machines must be regulated to 
one another. 
More recently the assembly line has been brought under a broader heading: 
line production. 'Line production is characterized by the continuous regular 
movement of materials from the stockpile through the necessary stages of fabrica­
tion to the finished product. . . . Line production requires a rational layout and 
2 
frequently, but not necessarily, involves the use of conveyor systems ... .'
In what follows we shall usually employ the term assembly line, which has 
become almost a synonym of full mechanization. 
Humanly and technically, the problem of the assembly line is solved when the 
worker no longer has to substitute for any movement of the machine, but simply 
assists production as a watcher and tester. This was done, quite suddenly, toward 
the end of the eighteenth century in Oliver Evans' mechanization of the grain­
milling process. But in the large-scale manufacture of complicated machinery 
(automobile chassis), the fully automatic prodoction line was not achieved until 
1920. 
In the transition phase, still predominant in industry, man acts as a lever 
of the machine. He must perform certain operations that are not yet carried 
out by mechanisms. True, the tempo of work is geared to the human organism; 
but in a deeper sense, the inexorable regularity with which the worker must 
follow the rhythm of the mechanical system is unnatural to man. 
The growth of the assembly line with its labor-saving and production-raising 
measures is closely bound up with the wish for mass-production. We find it 
used shortly after 1800 for complicated products, such as the manufacture of 
hiscnit in a victualling office of the British Navy, on a purely handicraft basis, 
i.e. without the use of machinery. A quite similar process was developed in the 
'thirties in the great Cincinnati slaughterhouses, where without mechanical 
auxiliaries systematic teamwork was introduced in the killing and dressing of 
1 
The term' assembly line' is of recent. date. Only in the supplement of the Oxford English Dictionary 
(1933) was there added this further meaning of msembly: 'The action or method of assembling a machine 
or its parts' (1897); the assembly line is not listed; assmWly-room, however, is defined as' a room in a work­
shop where the parts of some composite article are assembled.' An American source of 1897 is referred to. 
2 As defined in Wartime Technological Deuelopments, U.S. Senate, subcommittee monograph No.2, 
May 1945, p.348. 
77 