is fairly constant. It ordinarily resembles an egg, and experience has proved up 
till now that this form is the most advantageous and the most economical to 
concentrate and store the necessary heal, communicating it to the object which 
14 
it surrounds.' 
Thus the baking oven was an oval chamber encased in a thick, fireproof vault 
of clay, brick, or stone. A fue of logs and faggots was built within. Once the 
stones had stored enough heat, the ashes were raked out; then the dough was 
put in and slowly baked by the heat which the stones retained. The highest 
temperature struck the dough when it was frrst put into the oven, and the heat 
gradually abated in the course of baking; a natural process, coinciding with the 
needs of bread baking. Every detail of this simple device- the vaulting, the 
inclined hearth, the position of the flue- was the outcome of unfathomably 
ancient experience. 
The Influence of Technology: 1'he Indirectly Heated Oven 
The method in which the chamber was heated, the embers swept out, and the 
bread inserted came to be regarded as too slow for the large quantities of bread 
required by the nineteenth century. No continuous flow of production was 
possible. The bake oven could not be mechanized in it" traditional form. The 
frrst step, then, was to make the chamber in which the bread was baked separate 
from the fue. The baking chamber and the furnace chamber becan1e independent 
of one another. The hot gases \Vere made to pass, often in ingenious ways, 
around and over the baking chamber. This indirectly heated type became the 
basis for future mechanization. Count Humford (1753-1314), the adventurous 
New Englander, Bavarian general, horticulturist, founder of the public soup 
kitchen, and an ingenious pioneer in thermodynamics, was one of the first to 
bring about fuel economy by drawing the flame and hot gases around the baking 
chambers of the six ranges in his Munich soup kitchen (fig. 348). These chambers 
were constructed of cast-iron plates and their flues could be regulated, thus 
15 
creating the modern range.
The nineteenth century developed the technique of healing air in special 
chambers before conducting it into the baking chamber. This type was called 
the aerotherme. In principle, this is nothing other than the hot-air heating favored 
in dwellings throughout the second half of the nineteenth century, with the 
difference that the aerotherme ovens were a closed heat circuit. The air, heated 
4 
1 Parmentier, Nouveau Cours complel d'agricullure lheorique el pratique, 16 vols., new ed., Paris, 1821-3, 
vol. 6, p.565, article on 'Four.' 
lli Augustin Rollet, op.cit. p.437. In his sixth chapter, 'Des Fours,' pp.411-78, Rollct gives an excellent 
acce)unt of the development of the oven. 
173 