In order to function, man's organi•m requires a specific temperature, a specific 
quality of climate, air, light, humidity, and food. To function, in this context, 
means to preserve one's bodily equilibrium. Our organism means contact with 
the earth and things that grow. Thus far man's body is subject to the laws of his 
animal life. 
On the other hand, the relations between man and his enviromnent are subject 
to continual and restless change; from generation to generation, from year to 
year, from instant to instant, they are in danger of losing their equilibrium. 
There is no static equilibrium between man and his enviromnent, between inner 
and outer reality. We Cdllilot prove in a direct way how action and reaction 
operate here. We cannot tangibly grasp these processes any more than we can 
the nucleus of an atom. We can only experience them through the several ways 
in which they L-rystallize. The differing creations of the Romans, of medieval 
man, and of the Baroque evince the relentlessly changing relation between man 
and the external world. 
No closed circles and no repetitive pattern exist to define the adjustments of 
imter and outer reality. They evolve in curves, never repeating themselves. 
The feeling of delight that is produced when the human organism is in perfect 
health, functioning at its best, does not last for long. To restore this bodily 
equilibrium and thus impart physical happiness is, as we have said, the basic 
purpose of true regeneration. 
As soon as inner and outer reality agree, corresponding developments occur in 
the psyche of man. There is never a standstill. All is in a stste of flux. 
Our period demands a type of man who can restore the lost equilibrium between 
inner and outer reality. This equilibrium, never static hut, like reality itself, 
involved in continuous change, is like that of a tightrope dancer who, hy small 
adjustments, keeps a continuous balance between his being and empty space. 
We need a type of man who can control his own existence by the process of 
balancing forces often regarded as irreconcilable: man in equipoise. 
We have refrained from taking a positive stand for or against mechanization. We 
cannot simply approve or disapprove. One must discriminate between those 
spheres tha~ are fit for mechanization and those that are not; similar problems 
arise today in whatever sphere we touch. 
720 