feeling. They rapidly spread through Europe during the 'thirties. We must 
23 
unfortunately pass over the details of their progress.
With the mid-'thirties came a lull in the invention of new types. A not incon­
siderable factor was that the architects whose names we associate with the new 
types were called to more urgent tasks: greater buildings, urbanism, and large­
scale planning in which interest was growing. To the field they left, this was a 
loss, hut from a broader point of view, a favorable portent~ architects at the 
same time formulating chairs and shaping cities: A sign that the architect's vo­
cation is one of the first in our time tD transcend specialization and to approach 
problems in a universal way. 
At a time when the Continental countries, from Spain to Sweden, were awak­
ening to their self-inflicted surroundings, the two great lands of nineteenth­
century enterprise fell into inactivity. Following the death of William '\1orris 
and the wane of Arts and Crafts, England hegan to shnnber in architecture 
and in furniture. The last manifestation of international scope was Mcintosh 
and the Scottish school. In America at this time the late Louis Sullivan and 
Frank Lloyd Wright were non-existent to the public mind. The center of grav­
ity shifted to the Continent, and here the new architecture and the new interior 
were formulated. 
America, which in the nineteenth century made such pioneering attempts in 
the field of furniture, is altogether missing from the decisive phases of the 
'twenties. In the whole movement and its direction we believe America's 
absence can he felt. America not ouly lost all enthusiasm for the furniture of 
the engineer, its combinahility and its mobility; there was also a falling away 
of interest in the rooms in which we eat and relax. 
At a time when Europe was beginning to take stock of her architecture and 
interiors, America gave way to a growing penchant for 'antiques.' Industry 
23 
Thus Sweden, guided hy men such as Gregor Paulsen, the historian, and Asplund, the architect, 
began to take leave of its sugary and popular arts and crafts. This occurred when the Swedish 'Verkhund 
(arts and crafts society) held its bold exposition in Stockholm in 1930. 
The Swiss, whose architectural campaigns started in the 'twenties, took the decisive step with the 
Neuhiihl Settlement (1932) of the Zurich Werkbund. This settlement was founded under the auspices 
of the Swiss Werkbund through the colk>ctive efforts of the Swiss members of International Congresses 
for Modern Architecture (ClAM)~- M. E. Haefeli, W. M. 1\-Ioser, E. Roth, R. Steiger, H. Schmidt, and 
others. At the same time, 'Wobnbedarf' (standards for the interior) was established in ZUrich to test and 
put into production the furniture designs of leading Swiss and European architects. Hs furniture was 
intended for the middle class and great care was taken to turn out 'popular' models (Volk.mwdelle). 
From 1921 on, the Italians held their Triennial Expositions, seeking time and again to give currency 
to the ideas of the modern movemtmt. But in contrast to results in Sweden and Switzerland, the 
Italians never succeeded in reaching the greater public. In Spain the organizing talent of J. L. Sert 
brought Barcelona to the forefront. And finally the British joined the movement in 1937 with the Bur­
lington Gallery Exhibition. The initiative was taken hy architects of the MARS (Modern Architectural 
Research) ~British section of the ClAM. 
509 