108. Chicago Stockyards in the Earl)' 
1880's. Begun in 1865, while La Villelle 
was still under construction, the Union 
Stockyard$ correspond to American con~ 
dition.~. The wild herds brought in from 
the greal plains needed no sheller. Sum­
mer and winter, they cou.ld wail in open 
pens; from this assembly point they as­
cended lo the lop of flie packing house by 
uncavered gangways. 
moment. It is a true labyrinth of sheds and enormous halls that communicate in various 
ways by passages, staircases, and suspension bridges, over which pass the workmen and 
over which runs the railway. Without a guide, one could never flnd his way in these 
immense structures. s 
This description is of the time when the processing of livestock had reached a 
high point, over five million hogs yearly passed through Chicago's Union Stock 
Yards. The plants had a processing capacity of some 200,000 hogs daily, a 
figme which La Villette at that time did not equal in a whole year.' 
The Mechanizing of Meat Production in America 
The American meat industry is rooted in lhe very structure and dimensions 
of the land. Only these can explain its origin and its character. Long hefore 
industrialization gained this domain, its prerequisites were already framed in 
the configuration of the land. 
s Scientifw American, 21 Aug. 1886, p. I 20. 
9 These figures alone give a distorted picture of the whole~ We ha\·e therefore brought the yearly 
turnover of Chicago and of Paris side by side. The Parisian data arc drawn from La Grande Encyclopedie, 
Paris, 1884; the Chicagoan from Andreas, op.dt. vol.3, p.335. Comparison of the yearly requirements 
not only affords insight into food preferences; it also points up the divergent ways of Europe and America. 
Paris slaughters twice as many sheep and six times as many c.alves as Chicago. Chicago slaughters pigs 
to about thirty-three times and cattle to about. nine times the Parisian numbers. One firm alone, Swift 
and Co., in Chicago processes in this year about twice as many cattle as consumed by Paris in the same 
period (Swift and Co.'s production for 1384-5: 429,1·83 head). One also notes that America doe.<~ not sub­
divide the heading 'Cattle.' In Europe the flesh of the cow is held in low esf.eem, hence the lower Pari­
sian figure; that of the ox, on the other hand, is highly prized. But in the lJnited States oxen, used as 
beasts of draught on small farms, are killed in decreasing numbers. 
. Oxen and Bulls, 184,900 189,490 
Paris 
Cows, 43,099 
213 