and this finish will not stand hard usage, as the enamel coating cracks easily 
and peels off.' 
The popular tub, 'having quite a large sale, is the tub formed out of sheet 
steel' with 'an inner lining of sheet copper (no casing necessary) provided with 
cast-iron legs.' 
Next come tbe three luxury versions. First 'tbe all-copper bathtub, a hath­
tub made from one piece of sheet copper, having no outside shell ... neat iron 
support and a bard wooden cap. The all-copper bathtub is also meeting with 
great success.' 
'The porcelain crockery enameled bathtub.' Characteristics: 'No chance 
for dirt ... no wood work in or about it, made of one piece ... this tub will last 
a life.' Drawback: 'Requires greatest mre in handling to deliver it safely .... 
Very cold to the touch until it has become entirely warm from the hot water.' 
And a final trump card: the new alnminum bathtub. Advantage: 'Very light, 
makes a beautiful finish, a perfectly sanitary' article, but ... very high in price 
and can only be bought by the rich.' 
To tbe exceptionally discriminating client a sunken bath with richly orna­
mented tiles is recommended. 
What, then, was the average man to choose if, of the dozen models, one alone, 
the aluminum tub, was allegedly without drawbacks - but at an inaccessibly 
high price? 
The Shaping of the Standard Type, c. 1920 
Such was the situation around 1900. From this chaos, the present-day 
standard type finally emerged around 1920. This was tbe durable mst-iron 
enameled tub. Its technical development had required close to half a century. 
It made its appearance in America around 1870: Output of the leading manu­
103 
facturer, one tub per day. The mid-'seventiessaw a slow rise in production. 
Yet in 1890, this tub was still being advised 'lgainst: 'White-glass enamel looks 
well at first but it is certain to chip where hot water is used, as the iron expands 
104 
and contracts much more freely than the enamel.' Thus in tbe mid-'nineties, 
a pioneer Chicago firm could adduce long manufacturing experience as a strong 
105 
point in favor of its wares. Down to 1900, all sanitary fixtures were hand-
103 Information concerning the early development will be found in John C. Reed, 'The Manufacture 
of Porcelain Enamelled Cast Iron Sanitary Ware,' an address delivered at the annual meeting of the 
Eastern Supply As:;n., New York, 14 Oct. 1914. Manuscript in possession of the American Standard 
and Radiator Co., Pittsburgh, Pa. 
liM W. H. Maguire, op.cit., p.271. 
105 
'A quality of unsurpassed perfect workmanship and thorough experience, enable us to place on the 
market enamelled iron bathtubs of every size and description.' L. Wolff Mfg. Co., Chicago, Ill., Catalogue 
for 1895-6. 
702 