RECLINING FURNITURE 
The modern types of rest furniture were likewise formed in the late eighteenth 
century. They were for brief transitory relaxation, and gave a comfort quite 
different from the static repose of a bed. 
The chaise longue is, as its name indicates, a lengthened form of the chair. 
It has a headpiece, like the bed, but more emphatic. From the settle, there 
developed in France and England, in the first decades of the seventeenth century, 
a reclining chair, day bed (lit de repos), the he2d section of which was adjusted 
by gears or chains. In the chaise longue, the curved gondola form replaced this 
adjustable plane. If hefore a bergere is placed an upholstered bench or stool 
(tabouret), a 'long chair,' or chaise longue is produced. Made in one piece­
of this too there were many varieties- it was called a duchesse (fig. 177). This 
furniture, as its names indicate- marquise, duchesse- was intended for the 
ladies of the nobility, who occupied it while receiving in light attire. 
Once fantasy began to create reclining furniture, the most diverse combina­
tions appeared. The top section of the chaise longue being made to open up, a 
shallow bathtub was inserted in the frame, as sometimes seen in erotic plates 
of the late eighteenth century. Or with a tubouret, a high-backed and a low­
backed bergere might be placed on either side; this combination was called 
duchesse brisee, divided duchesse. 
Around 1800, the duchesse became the psyche, in imitation of Pompeiian furni­
ture. Later we shall encounter its American derivative around 1830 (fig. 322), 
whose surface undulates in a free form at hellt suited to brief intervals of relaxa­
tion. We shall then look into its link with recent developments, LeCorbusier's 
tubular steel recliner, the 'chaise longue basculante' (fig. 323). LeCorbusier's 
austere, unupholstered recliner adheres in mood to the starting point, the seven­
teenth-century day bed; but its adaptation to the body incorporates the expe­
rience of later centuries. 
The patent-furniture era, especially the 'sixties and 'seventies, mechanized 
the chaise longue. Various ways of transforming it into twin beds now come to 
band (fig. 264). The upholsterer, meanwhile, destroying its structure as he 
destroys the fauteuil's, turns it into an invertebrate piece. Now the chaise 
longue is mainly to be found near the bed in the bedroom, a usage that first 
appears in the erotic scenes around mid-eighteenth century. 
The sofa continues the settle, the upholstered bench with back and armrests. 
Its shaping advances parallel with that of the chair, of which it is increasingly 
conceived as a companion. It is essentially a salon piece (fig. 178). 
Rocaille reflects the will of the period to render things flexible. Impelled by 
the demand for expression indissolubly merged with function, it produced far 
316 