reinforced mncrete building, its fa<;ade a vast expanse of glass, its auto park 
accommodating 500 delivery trucks." 
The production method is the same as in ahnost all modern factories: that is, 
production starts in the upper storeys; conveyor systems link one operation to 
another. Oliver Evans, in his mill at Red Clay Creek (1784), was the first to 
muple the force of gravity with mechanical conveyor systems. In the modern 
bread factory, the flour is first elevated to the top storey, where batteries of 
high-speed mixers are aligned. Each of these mixers holds three and a half 
barrels (or some 600 pounds). 'Mammoth' mixers have been abandoned; they 
overheated the dough. The plant we visited formerly had the largest mixer of 
this kind, capable of mixing 30 barrels, or nearly 6000 pounds, of dough at a time. 
But giant mixers and giant troughs were unsuited to so sensitive a material. 
After a few minutes of mixing, the heavy mass of sponge-~ or first mix­
is poured from each machine into a trough. The troughs swing on pivots much 
as miners' towears, but much longer, and hang by strong rods from trollies 
which glide on a monorail close to the ceiling. The system is the same in prin­
ciple as that used for moving carcasses in packing houses, but far more massive. 
The troughs are shunted into the next room, where fermentation take"' place. 
Trough follows trough along the ceiling, train after train, monorail after mono­
rail, as in a suspended freight yard. In four and a half hours the sponge rises 
from the bottom of the trough to the brim. The slowly forming gas bloats the 
mass like a balloon, and if the elastic, membrane-like layer spanning the vessel 
is broken open, the warm carbonic-acid gas rushes out and it is possible to look 
into muntless invisibly working gas chambers. At this stage, the living mass 
still has the irregular hollows, bubbles, and cavities of the hand-made loaf. 
After the mass stands for four and a half hours, the train is set in motion. 
Trough after trough is pushed to the rear of the room and tipped over; the 
sponge flows through large openings in the floor down to the storey below. 
There it goes into a second battery of mixers, where the irregular sponge is 
given the ingredients it needs to become a uniform mass. Before fermentation, 
only about 60 per c;,nt of the flour is put in. Now the other 40 per cent is added, 
along with milk, water, fats, six parts per hundred of sugar, vitamins, and what 
other ingredients may seem desirable. The dough now has its final composition. 
After this semnd passage through the high-speed mixers, the dough must be 
allowed half an hour or an hour's rest, to appease the shaken-up molecules. Then 
it is ready to be divided. Again it drops one storey groundwards, where a divider 
nswe are indebted to Mr. W. A. Sieber, manager of the Freihofer Baking Co., Philadelphia, for his 
obliging guidance and information. 
193 