'eighties they found their standard form, and toward the end of the period they 
were made as real display pieces, such as the bed of 1891 (fig. 269), which, when 
folded, hecame a mirrored wardrohe of 'richly figured mahogany.' These beds 
were also called 'parlor bedsteads,' for they were to stand in a parlor, not in a 
hedchamber. In later years they hecame quite rare in private houses, although 
frequently used iu hotel rooms, until even there they slowly disappeared. The.se 
beds folding on one end were not revived until many years later, when the Pull­
man Company, in 1937, brought out its roomette cars (fig. 270). 
Few pieces so preoccupied the inventors hetween 1850 and 1890 as the heel 
that would convert into some other object. Furniture was used dummy fashion, 
as envelopes for beds, in numerous ways. It is a widely ramified hut none too 
satisfactory field, for in most cases it means not metamorphosis so much as 
mimicry. A hed that becomes a sofa for day use justly serves its double purpose: 
It is a sofa and it is a hed. It changes not merely its appearance but its nature: 
metamorphosis. But a hed that assumes, for instance, the guise of a piano, 
attempts to pass for something that it is not. This is mimicry." Here the ruling 
taste and the constituent furniture of 1he nineteenth century met, leading to a 
cleavage that sometimes bordered on the ludicrous. Here historians who like 
the grotesque will find abundance of rich material. 
At the outstart, problems of convertibility were tackled in full earnest. New, 
almost incredible, combinations were contrived. Thus one inventor (1866) con­
structed a piano comhineAl with an almost complete bedroom set (fig. 268), and 
be stated: 'It has been found hy actual u.se that this addition to a piano-forte 
46 
does not in the least impair its qualities as a musical instrument.' This com­
hination was achieved in the simplest way, hy the use of the vacant space under 
the hody of the piano, which, 'instead of resting upon the customary legs, is 
supported by a frame, B. . . . The frame B is so arranged as to contain a bureau, 
E, and two closets, F and G ... to hold the bed-clothes ... a wash-howl, pitcher, 
towels, &c.' The hed filled a sort of gigantic drawer in the frame supporting 
the combination, and was drawn out by two handles. 
Still the inventor was not satisfied. He added thereto a revolving piano stool, 
'also reserved for a distinct patent.' Its seat, when lifted, revealed a lady's 
workbox and a toilet mirror. Drawers and a hinged writing flap completed the 
roster of diverse equipment which it offered. The naivete of comhining objects 
45 
U.S. Palent97,101, Combined Bed and Musical-Instrument Board, 23 Nev. 1869. There is quite 
an early drift toward this dubious fleld of dummy furniture. Yet constituent problems still hold the fore­
ground. Occasionally, in the wane of the period, mimicry falls into the absurd, as with the bed whose 
daytime envelope is a chimney: U.S. Patent 334,501·, Combined Bedstead and Fire-place, 19 Jan. 1886. 
6 
• U.S. Patent 56,413, Improved Combined Piano, Couch, and Bureau, 17 July !866. 
434 