These are quite new challenges to the engineer. To gauge the achievement, 
let us select from the long line an example of 1389- the year the Eiffel Tower 
(fig. 246) was raised. The body-supporting surfaces have by now broken up 
into seveu different sections (fig. 247): headrest and footrest, t"o mobile arm­
rests, and a hody rest subdivided into four panels. The base becomes a receptacle 
for the machinery, with its interlocking system of rods, levers for adjusting the 
position as desired. 'Means of raising vertically or lowering the body of the 
23 
chair or to rotate the body of the chair on the supporting base' are provided 
as a matter of course. The iron framework of the base with its machinery is 
still open to view. Later it "ill he concealed and the mechanism hygienically 
housed in a white enamel case. But near the end of the 'eighties the essential 
solution- machinery for more differentiated control- is already reached. 
MECHAJ\'IZATION OF THE BARBER CHAIR 
Does the barber chair belong in the line of adjustable lounges or among orc!i­
nary chairs? The answer depends upon whether we have in mind the European 
or the American barber chair. 
In Europe the lordship of ruling taste left the barber chair an unwieldy thing, 
as stiff and static as the railroad seat, the lounge, or the sofa. In 1901, when 
Henry van de V elde iustalled a long row of barber chairs in the glistening interior 
24 
of Haby's- Berlin's fashionable hair-dresser, one of the first shops to he 
decorated hy an artist - these chairs had the tenuous Art nouveau curves; hut 
rudimentary headrests aside, they remain perfectly rigid and immovable, in 
striking contrast to the lines sinuously playing throughout the shop itself. Even 
in 1940 in Europe, the static barber chair was almost universal. As in the eight­
eenth centncy, a harher has to peer beneath the chin of the customer he is 
shaving and only by a characteristic upward tilt of the elbow is he able to see 
what he is doing. 
In America around mid-century- as the patent furniture movement gets 
under way- the barber chair hegins to throw off its century-old stiffness. At 
this period, we have recalled, the barber was, at the same time, dentist and, 
often, surgeon. He performed simple operations such as extracting teeth and 
bloodletting, and for centuries the two professions were united in that of the 
'barber-surgeon.' 
Various as are the dentists', the barbers', and the surgeons' needs, they have 
one common requirement: to bring the patient's head or body into the position 
of greatest accessibility. 
23 24 
U.S. Patent 397,077, 29 Jan. 1889. Karl Ernst Ost.haus, Van de Velde, Hagen i W., 1920, p.29. 
413 