idea of free Lrade reached its short peak under Gladstone in the next decade. 
A glinuner of universality is also found in the writings of the great savants, 
such as Claude Bernard's Introduction ii la physique experimenlale, 1865. 
Herbert Spencer, most influential spokesman for the creed of progress as the 
second half of the century came to understand it, surely did not intend his 
evolutionary teachings in the sociological sphere (before Darwin) as license for 
commercial irresponsibility in the name of laissez fa ire. Evolution is now used 
interchangeably with progress, and natural selection with the results of free 
competition. In this ronndahont way Herbert Spencer was turned into the 
philosopher of the ruling taste. He provided the theoretical bulwark. A sociolo­
gist has recently observed that over 300,000 copies of Spencer's works were sold 
in America in the space of four decades.' 
Eighteenth-century faith in progress as formulated by Condorcet started from 
science; that of the nineteenth century, from mechanization. Industry, which 
brought about this mechanization with its unceasing flow of inventions, had 
something of the miracle that roused the fantasy of the masses. This was espe­
cially true in the time of its greatest popularity and expansion, the latter half 
of the century. The period in which the great international expositions are 
historically significant- from London, 1851, to Paris, 1889- roughly delimits 
that time. These festivals to the ideas of progress, mechanization, and industry 
fall off as soon as faith in the mechanical miracle becomes dimmed. 
Belief in progress is replaced by faith in production. Production for produc­
tion's sake had existed ever since the Lancashire cotton spinners first showed 
the world what mechanization on the grand scale was capable of doing. With 
the waning of faith in progress, floating as a metaphysical banner over the fac­
tories, there entered that faith in production as an end in itself. Fanaticism for 
production as such was heretofore confined to the manufacturing groups. In 
the time of full mechanization, faith in production penetrated every class and 
ramification of life, thrusting all other considerations into the background. 
ASPECTS OF MECHANIZATION 
MEcHANIZATION, as envisaged and realized in our epoch, is the end product 
of a rationalistic view of the world. Mechanizing production means dissecting 
work into its component operations- a fact that has not changed since Adam 
Smith thus outlined the principle of mechanization in a famous passage of his 
1 Thomas Cochran and ·william :Miller, The Age of Enterprise, A Social History of Industrial America, 
New York, 1942, p.125. C£. the entire chapter, 'A Philosophy for Indui!trial Progress,' ibid. pp. 119-28. 
31: 