sufficiently clear that the decay of the Roman Empire was primarily the result 
of weaknesses in the social and economic structures of the provinces. Behind 
the thermae lay the insight that an institution is needed in public life to help 
restore the body's equilibrium once within its twenty-four-hour cycle. 
The obstinacy with which Rome and Byzantium, until their decline, and 
Islam, until the onset of mechanized life, clung to their total regeneration shows 
how deep-seated in human nature is the need for such institutions. 
With the growth of the thermae a new social factor entered history: Each 
individual was recognized as endowed with the same right to regeneration­
moreover, tn regeneration within the twenty-four-hour cyele. 
The cutting off of the Roman water-supply when the nomads destroyed the 
Campagna aqueduct at the wane of the Empire has told upon our cultural life 
down to the present day. 
Itinerary of the Regeneratinn Types 
Where did the archetype originate? All signs point to the East, to the interior 
of the Asiatic Continent. The primitive type of total regeneration has main­
tained itself longest in Russia. It spreads to European Russia, to Siberia, and, 
around the twelfth century, into middle Europe and England. It reaches its 
fullest Western expansion in the late Gothic period. We find it mentioned in 
the earliest chronicles of the Russians and of the Fiuns. We shall deal more 
closely with this early type in our section on the vapor bath as a social institution. 
The principle of the present-day Russian type was familiar tn the Greek 
Herodotus, who describes a steam bath of the simplest kind. "Whether it traveled 
to Greece through Asia Minor or over the Balkans, or along hoth paths, is not 
ascertainable. A well-developed version left its traces in the Nile Delta during 
the third century B.c., under the Ptolemies. From highly technilied, Hellen­
istic Egypt, it passes tn the Roman Empire - Pompeu, Rome - in the first 
century B.C. In this period a clear-cut form branches out, the Roman thermae, 
having a graduated series of hot rooms and incorporating the gymnasium of 
the Greeks (fig. 445). 
If the archetype spread centrifugally from the interior of Asia, a similar 
process now takes place with Rome as its center. In the time of Rome's expan­
sion the thermae will be carried to the frontiers of the civilized world. 
A remarkable phenomenon is then observed. In Syria, during the third 
century A.D., the Roman type (thermae) comes up against the original Asiai:ic 
type, having no athletic culture, no palestra, no cold swiunning pool (frigi­
darium). Striking similarities of plan and scale show that these small Syrian 
634 