as yet no full connection with St. Lonis. It was then that the charm of this 
landscape impressed itself upon him: 
I became fully sensible of the beauty and the sublimity of the prairies. They embrace 
every texture of soil and outline of the surface, tall grass interspersed with flowering 
plants of every line ... occasionally clumps of trees stood on the surface like islands on 
the sea. 
Sometimes I found myself amidst of the area without trees or object of any kind within 
the range of vision ... the surface clothed with interesting vegetation around me, appear­
ing like a sea, suggested ideas which I had not then the means of recording and which can~ 
27 
not be recalled.
He travels from homestead to homestead. He has to share the bed of others 
or to sleep on a dirty tick, which, placed on the ground, formed the couch of 
28 
five people. 'I laid my head on my knapsack.' What he tells of the interiors 
recalls the slums of the industrial cities of England or France at the time. It 
is a subsistence level. 'The farmer,' he says elsewhere, 'seemed contented to 
live ... there were no barns to be seen, everywhere tl1e wheat was threshed in 
29 
the open air or on the bare earth.' 
These temporary conditions do not deceive him, and it is interesting to observe 
how keenly this Scot farmer sees through the theories of Mal thus: 'The wide 
expanse [of the prairie] appeared the gift of God to man for the exercise of his 
industry, and there being no obstacle to immediate cultivation, nature seemed 
inviting the husbandman to till the soil and partake of her bounty. Mr. Malthus' 
doctrine that population increases faster than the means of subsistence appeared 
more than doubtful.' And he compares the prairie, 'where cultivated fields 
form a mere speck on the surface,' against conditions in Britain: 'I felt grateful 
at beholding a field so well fitted to relieve the depressed and starving population 
of Great Britain and Ireland, while the conduct of their landowning and tithe­
eating legislators, in restricting the circulation of nature's bmmty, appeared 
30 
sinful.' 
Time and the Social Moment 
In comparison with Ohio to the South, the Middle West slumbered ahnost 
until mid-century. Even in 1850 the population-density in many parts of Illinois 
31 
varied between two and six inhabitants per square mile, and in 1859, that is 
2
7 Patrick Shirreff, A Tour through North America, Edinburgh, 1835, p.244. 
u Ibid. p.237. 
29 
Ibid. p.225. 
ao Ibid. p.245. 
31 P. W. Bidwell and John L. Falconer, Hi.story of Agriculture in the Northern United States, Washington, 
1925. cr. maps showing population densities, 1790-1840, pp.148-51. 
143 