Usually the stream is broken by means of a perforated disk or other device. 
The Americans, when they sought to popularize it for working-class use around 
1395, called it the 'rain-bath.' Its finely divided stream allows more imaginative 
directing of the jets: from either side, from above, from below, through per­
forated tubes arranged spirally or horizontally. Around 1830 the rain bath, as 
already mentioned, often merges in symbiosis with the vapor bath for home use. 
Even a head irrigator, whose shape suggests a coil of rope, then appears on tee 
market. Water under pressure was supplied by a small elevated tank. All 
these models (and so it remained. for decades to follow) were portable, for there 
was no water supply to which they might be permanently attached. Usually 
the devices were more simple. A rare catalogue of a Birmingham frrm (1347), 
preserved in the Victoria and Albert Museum, illustrates such a standard model 
(fig. 463) that was to be used for decades, with minor variations, on each side 
of the Atlantic. A compact band pump drives the water from a hip bath or 
other vessel into a higher tank. The bather draws a curtain around him. Not 
until plumbing brought running water into the house was this pump type dis­
placed. In mid-century, the London Gre.at Exhibition, wbere in so many respects 
the century's future was written, displayed a wide range of showers. The bath­
tubs, on the other hand, were quite primitive. As time went on this contrast 
became even more marked. 
The catalogues of the 'eighties give less space to the bathtubs than to an 
astonishing selection of showers. Economy did not dictate the shower's triumph 
(they were destined for large houses) so much as the persuasion of hydropathy. 
Showers were introduced in American schools in the early 'nineties on the recom­
80 
mendation of a hydropathic physician.
Whether we consult the sources of 1350 or those of 1390, we find populariza­
tion of the shower advocated for identical reasons: Hhowers consume less water, 
less space, less time, require fewer repairs. In use, moreover, they are more 
81 
hygienic than the tub batb. Dr. Lassar, propounder of the People's Bath, is 
right again, for in large establishments the outlay and upkeep increase in geo-
so Cf. Wm. P. Gerhard, The Modern Rain Bath, New York, 1894: 'Quite recently Rainhaths haveheen 
introduced in the United States largely at the suggestion of the hydropathic physician Dr, S. Baruch, of 
New York City.' 
s1 'The baths most serviceable to the public generally are those ... which do not require a large supply 
of water ••. , On looking over the different kinds, the shower bath appears to possess those qualities in 
an eminent degree. For apart from the medical qualities ascribed to it, a complete ablution may be ob­
tained with a very small expenditure of water.' 'New Shower Bath,' The Illustrated London News, 
17 Aug. 1850, p.154, 
680 