The authors did not avoid the issue: 'Now, what is the matter with domestic 
service? . . . We cannot in this country maintain to any great extent large 
retinues of servants. . . . Every mistress of a family knows that her cares increase, 
with every additional servant.' Their verdict is unequivocal: 'A moderate style 
of housekeeping, small, compact and simple domestic establishments must 
7 
necessarily be the general order of life in America.' And finally they point to 
the solution: 'This being the ease, it should be an object in America to exclude 
the labors of the family all that can be ... excluded out af it by combined 
from 
8 
labor.' 
Even today, one could hardly state the problem more trenchantly. By force 
of circumstance, reality is gradually moving toward thls state. Sampling at 
random the views expressed around 1910, we learn that the servant problem is 
1 
to be solved' on the same plane as in other employments,' and as a direct result, 
'we are gradually coming to the abolishment of a permanent serving class in 
our homes.'' Meanwhile the problem incTeasingly shifted into the psychological 
sphere. 'There is a very strong case against the presence of the permanent 
worker in the horne ... .' She forces 'psychological adjustment . . . on the 
homemaker and on the entire family. . . . In many cases the standard of the 
home is consciously or unconsciously made less simple or adapted to the expec足
10 
tation and demands of the worker.' All this points back to Miss Beecher's 
proposal of 1869, that housework should be divided up so far as possible among 
the members of the family. In 1915 more pressing reasons are given: 'The serv足
antless household (by servantless is meant without resident workers) offers 
the only opportunity for a family to follow the exact standards ... and enables 
11 
a family cooperation and a chance for training the children.' The prerequisites 
for such a solution were supplied only when mechanization made it possible to 
reduce manual drudgery to a miuirnurn. 
Organization of the Wori< Process 
One must not confuse organization of the work process with the use of mecha足
nized tools. Organization of the work process, it should be stressed, was under足
way before mechanized tools became available. These were not uuiversal even 
in households of 1940. Household planning, then, began before household 
7 
Catherine E. Beeeher and Harriet Beecher Stowe, The American Woman's Home, New York, 1369, 
p.333. 
s Ibid. p.334. 
~Christine Frederick, 'The New Housekeeping,' Ladies llome Journal, 1912, vol. 29, no. 12, p.I6. 
to Frederick, Household Engineering; Scie,nllfw Management in the Home, Chicago, 1919; first issued 
11 
in 1915. Ibid. p.380. 
516 