A surface for the preparation of food was needed in the kitchen. At first a 
tahle top was placed on trestles, like all other tables, una mensa cum lrecellis. 
Horizontal hoards ahove provided a ready means of storing kitchen ware. These 
were the elements from which the dresser developed into the display furni­
ture of the fifteenth century, whose numher of shelves was an index of social 
rank. 
Research has centered largely around the history of styles, leaving much 
uncertainty as to where and how the types arose that now make up our intimate 
surroundings. Lacking is a typological history that would turn to account the 
facts piled up in the sixty years since Henri Havard compiled his Dictionary. 
What we need is not a dictionary of furniture, hut a comparative history of types, 
which might order and evaluate the contributions of the various lands. In such 
a history, the place of Flanders would surely prove outstanding. 
By creating these various types, the chair, the bench, the desk, and the 
dresser, and by giving the table its stable form, the fifteenth century laid down the 
beginnings of secular comfort. 
These types may seem primitive beside the refinement of eighteenth-century 
artisanship, although this is far from true of their artistic expression. Neither 
can their artistic or their technical handling yield the full secret of their power. 
For they were not conceived as isolated pieces. They grew as integral parts of 
the late Gothic room, in which they were rooted as a plant is rooted in the 
soil. 
Medieval Comfort, the Comfort of Space 
From today's point of view the Middle Ages had no comfort at all. 
The furniture was crude, the heating poor. Doubtless the sight of wood blaz­
ing in great piles will ever be an appealing one. The Middle Ages knew well 
how the hearth might be woven into domestic life and the fireside given a mean­
ing far beyond its bare usefulness. But what a relapse into the primitive after 
the villas, with their evenly heated floors and walls, found wherever the Romans 
settled beyond the Alps! 
It was cold in the medieval house. Time and again the miniatures show a 
small, round work table or dining table or bench drawn up close to the open 
flame, or, as it may be, a swing-back bench that allowed one alternately to face 
the fire and turn one's back to it (fig. 153). 
The same relapse into the primitive runs through the whole medieval interior. 
299 