even on the mechanical production of beet sugar. But one problem occupied him 
from beginning to end: that of conveyance within production. 
It began as early as 1315 when he built a mill for his brother in Zurich 'with 
some essential particulars . . . of a hoist of simple construction consisting in 
fact only of a large and broad flancbed strap-pulley and ropedrum . . . the 
sacks of grain could be made to ascend or descend at pleasure and the operatives 
26 
could pass from floor to floor by simply tightening or releasing the rope.' 
Installing a small factory for the manufacture of textile machines in Bolton 
21 
(1333), Bodmer constructed 'what is now called a travelling crane.' It was, as 
Roe remarks, one of the frrst, if not the first traveling crane." 
Bodmer, like Oliver Evans, was much interested in the endless belt. He used 
it (1334) to convey heavier materials and to serve new ends. He was tbe first 
to employ it for continuous fueling. It was he who invented the traveling grate 
for boilecs (lig. 47) and furnaces," 'to obtain the greatest possible degree in 
30 
economizing pitcoal.' Just as later in the assembly line the speed of tbe con­
veyor belt must he regulated to tbe pace of the worker, here the speed of the 
traveling grate is regulated to the rate of combustion. 'It was necessary to 
supply the furnace with fuel at a slow rate and continuously. These considera­
31 
tions led Mr. Bodmer to the adoption of a traveling grate surface.' Having 
divided tbc rigid grate into movable sections, he goes on to make the most 
diverse suggestions for his chain grates, for traveling or propelling grates, drum­
fire grates, thus broaching the domain of automatic stoking. He tried out a 
boiler stoked by his traveling frre grates in the Manchester machine-tool factory 
in 1339. After a while the experiment was dropped. It was still too early. Two 
decades later, about 1350, the endless belt found a place in American mechan­
ical bakeries (lig. 100), to carry the loaves slowly and continuously through the 
oven, thus reviving the idea applied by Admiral Coffin in 1310, to which we shall 
return in the section on the oven and the endless belt. 
Bodmer seems to have been still concerned with the problem of the traveling 
32 
grate. One of his comprehensive patents (1343) brings out further proposals 
in this field. 
Bodmer, as we have mentioned, used his traveling cranes in close co-ordination 
with large lathes and planing machines in the Manchester machine-tool factory 
(1339); to this was added a rational arrangement of the machines, and the mov­
ing of the material on rails to the machine where needed. 
u Institution of Civil Engineers' memoir on Bodmer, op.cit. p.579. 
7 
2 Ibid. p.58l. 
1 
2s J. W. Roe, op.cit. 3 Ibid. 
29 British Patent No. 6617, A.D. 1834. 32 British Patent No. 9899, A.D. 1843. The 
30 
Institution of Civil Engineers, op,cit. p.534. specification runs to 17 pages. 
92 