The bathroom could not become a component of the middle-class dwelling 
so long as one element was lacking: water. Water sellers drove their carts with 
tnhs of hot water through the streets of Paris. They carried the tub and the 
water up to the user's apartment. This was known as the ba.igrwire a domicile 
as against the fixed tuh of the public establishments. In 1838, Paris had 1013 
of these baigrwires a domicile, and 2224 of the fixed baths. 
The Englishman of the 'sixties would carry a folding gutta-percha tub with 
him when he traveled on the Continent. At home (fig. 468), he would be likely 
tO use a small hip hath, the shower in this case being more important than the tub. 
The combination of tuh and heater was often portable too. In 1850 Henry 
Cole recommends a tub and heater that might be used in any room having a 
stove pipe (fig. 473). A pair of tubes allowed the water to circulate directly 
between the tub and the heating unit. Rarely does Henry Cole show interest 
in technical inventions. But the apparatus apparently caught his fancy. Its 
principle was not a new one, being known to the late Middle Ages. Now, in 
1850, the time so expert in using fire gases to heat industrial hollers, this was 
about all the inventors could devise. 
This type, like the American folding hath already mentioned, starts from the 
assumption that no running water is available. It was to be found in American 
city houses during the last quarter of the centnry. Like the folding hed, it 
assumed. the fa<;ade of a wardrobe when not in use. Later it gained considerable 
favor among the farmers. It is a most persistent type, appearing in the mail­
order catslogues until well into our century. In the mid-'nineties its price and 
execution gave it an advantage over the fixed types (fig. 474). 
Running Water 
The seventeenth and eighteenth centuries cast a shadow behind them. In 
1800 the large cities still had no regular water supply. 
In Paris Napoleon sought to remedy this situation. A plan, dated 1812, upon 
which we chanced io the Bibliotheque Nationale, shows what was the state of 
canalization after Napoleon's enterprise: ouly the well-to-do districts such as 
the Faubourg St. Honore had water laid on. The popular quarters still had to 
rely upon occasional street fountains, water sellers, and particularly upon water 
from the Seine. 
During the second half of the centnry, cities everywhere were to be supplied 
with water throughout. Running water entered first the basement, then the 
storeys, and fioally each apartment. Words are too static. Ouly a moving 
picture could portray water's advance through the organism of the city, its 
684 