The Mechanizing of Production 
To carry through the mechanizing of production, another class of inventors, 
another class of doers, other sociological conditions, and another textile proved 
necessary. 
Silk was a luxury textile for a luxury class. The English experimented with 
cotton from the start, and constructed all their machines with cotlon in mind. 
Here was the road to mass production. And just as the textile itself was 
rougher, of a rougher fiber too was the class and the enviromnent that pushed 
forward its mechanization. 
Here the inventors were neither nobles nor savants. No academy published 
their experiments, and today's knowledge of the beginnings has to he pieced 
together from fragments. No govermnent set up privileged factories: the mecha­
nizing of production began in theN orth, in Lancashire, far from the ruling classes 
and the High Church of England. Lonely spots like Manchester -which did 
not attain corporato status before the nineteenth century and was without 
hampering guild restrictions - and a proletarian class of inventors were needed. 
One of the earliest of Manchester's large manufacturers observed these facts 
by 1794. 'Towns where manufactures are most flourishing, are seldom bodies 
corporate, commerce requiring universal encouragement instead of exclusive 
privileges to the natives and freemen of a particular district. Those who first 
introduced the cotton manufacture into Lancashire were Protestant refugees, 
who probably found small encouragement for themselves and their industries 
11 
amongst the corporate towns of England.' 
John Wyatt, who stretched the yarn between pairs of revolving cylinders 
instead of by hand and set up the first small mill in a Birmingham warehouse 
in 17 41, landed in debtors' prison. James Hargreaves, inventor of the spinning 
jenny between 1750 and 1757, was a poor weaver. And Richard Arkwright, 
1732-92, the first successful cotton spinner, who turned to advantage ideas 
upon which other men had foundered, was by trade a barber. Not before 1767 
did he turn from his nonnal calling, which consisted in buying up dull hair and 
by some process making it usable. In 1780 twenty factories were under his 
control, and at his death he left his son a large fortune. Climbing from 
below- he was the thirteenth child of a poor family- armed with an uuhreak­
ing will to conquer, and possessing a flair for success, he exemplifies in every 
trait the type of the nineteenth-century entrepreneur. In a hostile environment, 
without protectors, without government subsidy, but nourished by a relentless 
11 
T. Walker, Review of Some q.f lhe PoWica.l Even{$ Which Ha11e Occurred in Manchester During the Last 
Five Years, London, 1794. Quoted in Witt Bowden, Industrial Society in England Toward the End of the 
Eighteenih Century, New York, 1925, pp.56-7. 
37 