Appleby's binder (fig. 87), like .vlcCormiek's reaper, happily combined the 
pioneering work of various invenlnrs, so clleclively that to the present day no 
real departure from the principle bas been necessary. 'l\ o machine,' Marsh 
65 
adds, 'ever swept over the world with such overwhelming rapidity.' 
Today harvesters with the roof-profile still reap the fields. The endless belts 
carry the cut grain up one side and down the other, where, instead of the two men, 
an automat is mounted. The grain gathers and is pressed into a full sheaf. At that 
instant the mechanism is tripped (fig. 88). A. length of manila twine is carried 
round the bundle, knotted, and cut; a discharging arm throws the sheaf clear. 
The knotter (fig. 87) bas about the size and shape of a chicken's beak. To 
knot the cord it turns this way and that, wherein its movable tongue that loops 
the twine plays an important part. All the manufacturers, with a single excep­
66 
tion, became licensees of John Appleby. The success of the automat rests in 
greater production. 'This machine,' it is said in retrospect, 'has more than any 
67 
other made it possible to increase production.' With the automatic knotter 
around 1880, the standard of agricultural mechanization was reached. This is 
the time when four-fifths of the wheat grown in the United States are reaped 
by machine. Parallel with the reaper, other implements~ plows, disk and spring 
harrows, drills~ were improved and mechanized. 
In the time of full mechanization, a new type took its place next to the binder, 
combining all the operations from reaping to threshing in a continuous process. 
But this did not rob the Appleby binder of its value, for only in regions that 
have an equable climate can grain be conveyed directly from the ear to the sack 
without danger of fermentation. 
Retrospect: Starting from the time mechanization became an influence in pro-
duction, three phases may be distingnished. 
Reaping: about 1850. McCormick Reaper (invented 1831). 
Reaping with hand-binding: about 1870. Marsh Harvester (first model 1858). 
Automatic binding: about 1880. Appleby's Twine Binder (idea by 1858). 
Thus the standard is attained. Down to the advent of full mechanization, 
agricultural machines were improved in lightness, efficiency, and stability (steel 
frames). The improvement of the mechanisms was reflected in the gradual and 
constant rise of production in the period 1880-1920. 
Seen in the dimension of time, the mechanical reaper was perfected between 
1850 and 1880 with bewildering speed, with its most interesting period from the 
&5 Ardrey, op.cit. p.77. 
oo Onl:y the firm of Walter A. Wood went its independent wa-y, until its end in 190-4. 
a1 Thomas N. Carver, quoted 1n Yearbook of Agricullure, 1940, p.230, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Wash­
ington, D.C., 1941. 
161 