appeared before tbe chair was turned into a mobile, organic system, So press­
ing is the demand for relaxed posture that furniture is built that unconsciously 
seeks the answer without drawing on mechanieal means. 
In America during the 'thirties and 'forties, !here appeared on the market a 
couch known for its uncommon proportions as the 'Kangaroo.' It had tbe form 
of an ocean wave inviting the body to nestle in its curve. As men sometimes 
set their feet up on the mantle or the table-edge at this time, the end of this 
couch freely rose to the convenient height in a steep curve (fig. 322): 'The back 
is delightfully supported,' a contemporary exclaims, 'and when the feet rest 
31 
upon the other end the ease and comfort of the position can hardly be described.' 
Tradition bars the way only when creative power runs we.ak. When creative 
power comes to life, objects that centuries of use have left unchanged- plows, 
hammers, saws, or furniture -·- take on a new aspect. Thus a slight variation 
on the classical faldstool, formed of two x elements, produces a reclining chair 
32 
(1369) whose curves are admirably suited to the human body (fig. 253). 
Unassisted by complex mechanisms, it is virtually a sleight-of-hand. Having 
grasped the spirit in which this patent furniture germinated, we may easily 
understand its separate products. An inventor who can thus transform a camp 
utensil into a comfortable reclining chair by a single motion must surely be 
accustomed to regard a chair as a system of planes: planes not rigidly fixed in 
relation to one another, but transmutable and able to serve several functions. 
In traditional fashion, the chair folds around central pivots. Both back rest 
and seat are upholstered. The back rest does not end at the seat, but prolongs 
its upholstered plane below seat-level. At first sight this would seem rather 
aimless. But if one unhooks the seat and spreads the folding legs to their widest 
angle, the dead plane will come into play. The oversize back rest joins with 
the scat, folded over and out to form a new combination: a long-curved easy 
chair. 
As for its mechanical equipment- a few hinges - this chair could well have 
been invented in the fifteenth century. But altogether different methods of 
thinking lie behind it: the notion of the chair as a utensil composed of planes 
transmutable according to purpose. Behind it lies the constructive urge of the 
'sixties, succeeding here with genial simplicity. 
The Americans tend to become dissatisfied in the late 'sixties with one or 
two positions as obtainable from this folding chair of 1869. They wished for 
everyday household use the multiple combinations that had become familiar 
in invalid chairs. But this involved more or less complicated apparatus. 
31 
Quoted in Esther Singleton, The Furniture of Our Forefaihers, London, 1901, vol. 2, p.649. 
!Ill Folding Chair, U.S. Patent 92,133, 29 June 1869. 
419 