THE CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA IN ART 
plcte annihilation the Cubist experiments had brought Art, many Cubists 
themselves ha\'e tried to find a way out, but the lack of comequence has merely 
made them afraid and has driven them back to I ngrcs (Picasso, 191 9-23) and 
to the Gobelins of the sixteenth century (Braque, etc. ). This was not an outlet 
but a retreat. Our generation did not need to follow them since it has found a 
new concept of the world represented by the Constructive idea. 
The Constructive idea is not a programmatic one. It is not a technical 
scheme for an artistic manner, nor a rebellious demonstration of an a rtistic 
sect; it is a general concept of the world, or better, a spiritual state of a genera­
tion, an ideology caused by life, bound up with it and directed to inOuence its 
course. It is not concerned with only one discipline in Art (painting, sculpture 
or architecture) it does not even remain solely in the sphere of Art. This idea 
can be discerned in all domains of the new culture now in construction. This 
idea has not come with finished and dry formulas, it does not establish immut­
able laws or schemes, it grows organically along with the growth of our cen­
tury. It is as young as our century and as old as the human desire to create. 
The basis of the Constructive idea in Art lies in an entirely new approach 
to the nature of Art and its functions in life. In it lies a complete reconstruction 
of the means in the different domains of Art, in the relations between them, in 
their methods and in their aims. It embraces those two fundamental elements 
on which Art is built up, namely, the Content and the Form. These two ele­
ments are from the Constructive point of view one and the same thing. It does 
not separate Content from Form- on the contrary, it does not see as possible 
their separated and independent existence. The thought that Form could have 
one designation and Content another cannot be incorporated in the concept 
of the Constructive idea. In a work of art they have to live and act as a unit, 
proceed in the same direction and produce the same effect. I say 'have to' be­
cause never before in Art have they acted in such a way in spite of the obvious 
necessity of this condition. It has always been so in Art that either one or the 
other predominated, conditioning and predetermining the other. 
This was because in all our previous Art concepts of the world a work of 
art could not have been conceived without the representation of the external 
aspect of the world. Whichever way the artist presented the outside world, 
either as it is or as seen through his personal perceptions, the external aspect 
,remained as the point of departure and the kernel of its content. Even in those 
cases where the artist tried to concentrate his attention only on the inner world 
of his perceptions and emotions, he could not imagine the picture of this inner 
6 