• 
PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
ture of the particular form but it is one with the laws of the culture of pure 
relationships. 
First and foremost there is the fund amental law of cf)'llamic equilibrium 
which is opposed to the static equilibrium necessita ted by the particular form. 
The important task then of all art is to destroy the static equilibrium by 
establishing a dynamic one. Non-figurative art demands an attempt of what 
is a consequence of this task, the destruction of particular form and the construc­
tion of a rhythm of mutual rela tions, of mutual forms or free lines. \Ve must 
bear in mind, however, a distinction between these two forms of equilibrium 
in order to avoid confusion; for when we speak of equilibrium pure and simple 
we may be for, and at the same time against, a balance in the work of art. It is 
of the greatest importance to note the destructive-constructive quality of dyna­
mic equilibrium. Then we shall understand that the equilibrium of which we 
speak in non-figurative art is not without movement of action but is on the 
contrary a continual movement. Vve then understand also the significance of 
the name 'constructive art'. 
The fundamental law of dynamic equilibrium gives rise to a number of 
other laws which relate to the constructive elements and their relations. These 
laws determine the manner in which dynamic equilibrium is achieved. The 
relations of position and those of dimension both have their own laws. Since the 
relation of the rectangular position is constant, it will be applied whenever the 
work demands the expression of stability; to destroy this stability there is a law 
that relations of a changeable dimension-expression must be substituted. The 
fact that all the relations of position except the rectangular one lack that 
stability, also creates a law which we must take into account if something is to 
be established in a determinate manner. Too often right and oblique angles 
are arbitrarily employed. All art expresses the rectangular relationship even 
though this may not be in a determinate manner; first by the height and width 
of the work and its constructive forms, then by the mutual relations of these 
forms. Through the clarity and simplicity of neutral forms, non-figurative art 
has made the rectangular relation more and more determinate, until, finally, 
it has established it through free lines whic_ h intersect and appear to form 
rectangles. 
the relations of dimension, they must be varied in order to 
As regards 
avoid repetition. Although, as compared with the stable expression of the rect­
angular relationship, they belong to individual expression, it is precisely they 
that are most appropriate for the destruction of the static equilibrium of all 
48 