• 
PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTI C ART 
which to express themselves. It is here that neutral plastic mea ns ar c de­
manded. 
For pure art then, the subject can never be an additional value, it is the 
line, the colour and their relations which must 'bring into play the\'\ hole sen­
sual and intellectual register of the inner life' ... not the subject. Both in a b­
stract art and in naturalistic art colour expresses itself 'in accordance "i th Lhe 
form by which it is determined', and in all art it is the artist's task to make 
forms and colours living and capable of arousing emotion. If he makes art in to 
an 'algebraic equation' that is no argument against the art, it onl y pro\·es that 
he is not an artist. 
If all art has demonstrated that to establish the force, tension and move­
ment of the forms, and the intensity of the colours of reality, it is necessary that 
these should be purified and transformed; if all art has purified and trans­
formed and is still purifying and transforming these forms of reality and their 
mutual relations; if all art is thus a continually deepening process: why then 
stop halfway? I f all art aims at expressing universal beauty, why establish an 
individualist expression? Why then not continue the sublime work of the cub­
ists? That would not be a continuation of the same tendency, but on the con­
trary, a complete break-away from it and all that has existed before it. That would only 
be going along the same road that we have already travelled. 
Since cubist art is still fundamentally naturalistic, the break which pure 
plastic art has caused consists in becoming abstract instead of naturalistic in 
essence. While in cubism, from a naturalistic foundation, there sprang forcibly 
the use of plastic means, still half object half abstract, the abstract basis of pure 
plastic art must result in the use of purely abstract plastic means. 
In removing completely from the work all objects, 'the world is not separ­
ated from the spirit', but is on the contrary, put into a balanced opposition with the 
spirit, since the one and the other are purified. This creates a perfect unity be­
tween the two opposites. There are, however, many who imagine that they are 
too fond oflife, particular reality, to be able to suppress figuration, and for that 
reason they still use in their work the object or figurative fragments which indi­
cate its character. Nevertheless, one is well aware of the fact that in art one 
cannot hope to represent in the image things as they are, nor even as they 
manifest themselves in all their living brilliance. The impressionists, division­
ists, and pointillistes have already recognized that. There are some today who, 
recognizing the weakness and limitation of the image, attempt to create a work 
of art through the objects themselves, often by composing them in a more or 
52 