COLOUR IN INTERIOR ARCHITECTURE 
By AI berto Sartor is 
DuE to the course of development, that which appeared legitimate in the first 
stages of the new constructive movement in the sphere of interior architecture, 
is no longer so today. The reaction against colour, brought about by decorative 
abuses of the nineteenth century, served in the first instance to establish new 
ideas in architecture but has no longer any justification in the present day, 
when sensitiveness has rid itself of all its useless and superfluous elements. At one 
time, this reaction represented a very praiseworthy attitude, but its effects have 
now been left behind and a new future development is open to us. Everything 
that is connected with the interior equipment of the house must now be modi­
fied and revised according to new principles, in order to accompany naturally 
the integral development of rational architecture. 
Since the discoveries in the field of art and optics brought about by move­
ments such as the futurist, cubist, metaphysical, abstract and surrealist, and 
within the limits of these, we are bound to see the problem more profoundly 
than hitherto. Colour is a vital complement to architecture; it is one of its 
logical and indispensable elements. But, like architecture, it must no\"' express 
itself in a new manner and must follow the laws of constructive functionalism. 
At the moment two methods confront each other and mutually complete each 
other: what may be called the dynamic method and the neoplastic method. Both 
are firmly linked to the theories of architectural functionalism v.-hich have 
revivified the building art of our time. 
Above everything else, colours, chosen from a physiological point of view, 
must allow those special surroundings to be created which result from a logical 
and well-defined purpose. We know that there are colours which reflect the 
light and others which absorb it; those which are acoustic, those which are 
so to a less degree and those which do not react at all to the laws of acoustics, and 
212 