TH E WO RK O F T HE C.I.A.M. 
a later date, obtain this material for exhibition and propaganda purposes (un­
fortunately neither England nor U.S.A. has as yet arranged such an Exhibi­
tion).* Subsequently the material is also published. 'The dwelling for the sub­
sistence minimum' which formed the theme of the second congress has already 
appeared in three editions. \Ve have also found that our treatment and method 
of exposition have been used very extensively. 
As was mentioned in the preface to the published results of the third Con­
gress (Brussels, 27th-2gth November, I 930), these International Congresses 
aim at planning- out the main lines of future development by means of some­
thing which has hitherto appeared impossible, that is, a collaboration of all 
productive forces. This plan is not to be based on emotion but is to have its 
roots in realities. A knowledge of contemporary conditions and of contempor­
ary facts is necessary; only with the aid of these things can we assume there­
sponsibility of setting up general directives. 
The third Congress, which dealt whh 'R ational Methods of Siting', at­
tempted to examine different types of lay-out (low buildings, free grouping, 
north-south exposure, east-west exposure, buildings of medium height, high 
buildings, medium height and high buildings combined, historical examples) 
and to examine their relative effectiveness. 
I t is a big step from the rational division of the site to the examination of 
the whole town, and the necessary research requires an enormous expenditure 
of time and personal sacrifice. But C.I.A.1L ventured for the first time to take 
this step of expounding in a uniform manner an analysis of thirty-three 
towns from various parts of the world in order to be able to compare their 
structure. Only the feeblest beginnings for such a survey existed: the work 
should have been the task of an international institute rather than that of a 
few architects from eighteen different countries who were prepared to work in 
a disinterested way. But these architects will not have regretted their work: 
they have learnt-more than others-to know the structure and organism of 
their own towns. It took three years to collect all the material. The general 
principles were supplied by van Eesteren and the Dutch group using Amster­
dam as their example. The fourth Congress, 'The Functional Town' with this 
material as its basis, was to have taken place in Nloscow but was postponed two 
months before its opening date, and actually matured on board the Patris dur-
*As this article goes to press, the English group of modern architects, M.A.R.S. (Modern 
Architectural Research), announces its first large scale exhibition which will take place in the 
New Burlington Galleries in October I 937.-Eo. 
273 