• 
UNKNOWN COLOUR 
the expression of colour and this is probable but the one that is oflt'll'd or 
artificial light is not suflicient- for artificial light is transitory, .111d \\ c seek 
something free, but stable, calculated in clearness. 
~Ieanwhile as the eyes of man have seen more colour, more precise paint 
pigmen ts have been invented. After the Impressionists had seen gold glor} the 
Cadmiums \vere invented. After abstract freedom \\as seen the celestial ~ron­
astral Blue was invented. \'\'e need a violet paint. But if" e had that'' e should 
have a range of pigments capable of conveying the tension of sun light and 
could go ahead with our investigations. \r \'hat these will be is the secret of the 
living present. 
Into words they can not be put, and will never be put. They \vill be colour, 
and colours alone will state them. But just as in music, the most abstract music, 
there are abstract states of human emotion which correspond to the music, so 
there is in colour. 
If I should wish to convey an impression of a piece of music to another 
person there is no \vay other than music of doing this-but I can g ive some 
slight indication of the kind of music it is by giving an emotional analogy. I can 
say that the music was solemn- or that it expressed joy. 
So with colour we can say by analogy with human feeling the type of 
territory of the human spirit to which we are taken by colour-and very rough­
ly, for we are at the very beginning of our investigations-we know that these 
will not be intellectual, for colour is not intellectual. 
We know also that they will not be dramatic, for colour is not concerned 
with the clash of opposites and their movements. Very, very tentatively one may 
speculate that the research of colour may investigate into the territory of the 
abstract quality of our emotions, that quality of which we know hardly any­
thing, and in the direction of states of being-and being itself. \Vhat makes one 
suggest this to oneself is that those words which evoke colour out of blindness 
are such words as freedom, wonder, deep content. 
60 