CONSTRUCTION IN SPACE 
different point of view. We consider it as an absolute sculptural element, re­
leased from any closed volume, and we represent it from inside with its own 
specific properties. 
I do not hesitate to affirm that the perception of space is a primary natural 
sense which belongs to the basic senses of our psychology. The scientist will 
probably find in this affirmation of mine a large field for argument and will 
surely suspect me of ignorance. I do not grudge him this pleasure. But the 
artist, who is dealing with the domain of visual art, will understand me when 
I say we experience this sense as a reality, both internal and externaL Our task 
is to penetrate deeper into its substance and bring it closer to our consciousness; 
so that the sensation of space will become for us a more elementary and every­
day emotion the same as the sensation oflight or the sensation of sound. 
I n our sculpture space has ceased to be for us a logical abstraction or a 
transcendental idea and has become a malleable material element. It has be­
come a reality of the same sensuous value as velocity· or tranquillity and is in­
corporated in the general family of sculptural emotions where up to date only 
the weight and the volume of mass have been predominant. It is clear that this 
new sculptural emotion demands a new method of expression different from 
those which have been used and should be used to express the emotions of mass, 
weight and solid volume. It demands also a new method of execution. 
The stereometrical method in which Cube II is executed shows elemen­
tarily the constructive principle of a sculptural space expression. This prin­
ciple goes through all sculptural constructions in space, manifesting all its 
varieties according to the demands of the sculptural work itself. 
At this place I find it necessary to point those too hasty conclusions which 
some followers of the constructive movements in art have arrived at in their 
anxiety not to be left in the rear. Snatching at the idea of space they hasten to 
assume that this space-idea is the only one which characterizes a constructive 
work. This assumption is as wrong an interpretation of the constructive idea in 
sculpture as it is harmful for their own work. From my first affirmation of the 
space-idea in the Realistic Manifesto, 1920, I have not ceased to emphasize that 
in using the spacial element in sculpture I do not intend to deny the other 
sculptural elements; that by saying, 'We cannot measure or define space with 
solid masses, we can only define space by space', I did not mean to say that 
massive volumes do not define anything at all, and are therefore useless for 
sculpture. On the contrary, I have left volume its own property to measure 
and define-masses. Thus volume still remains one of the fundamental at-
107 