• 
THE QUARREL WITH REALISM 
ture, the result of mathematics- and here mathematics arc invoked as beauty 
and not as an imposition- this architecture, the hub of which is proportion, the 
human race is ready to accept, and to listen to carefully chosen discourses in 
places perfectly in harmony with them. \Ve shall have the desire to call in the 
painter or the sculptor. 
When we arrange matters so as to collaborate with the painter and the 
sculptor, we have no intention of asking only trifles of them. V\'hen '" e invite 
into our house a worthy, dignified and able guest, whom we respect, '' c do not 
make a noise near him; we listen, and he speaks amid silence because he has 
something to say. In the collaboration of the major arts and of architecture, 
dignity is not an empty claim. 
The conclusion becomes clear. Such an art requires elevation of character 
and of temperament. Who is ready for this immediate task? Excuse me if I 
speak frankly. I will not hesitate to do so, for it is necessary. I fear this immense 
artistic production which is quite indifferent to the advent of contemporary 
architecture. I love walls beautifully proportioned and I dread to see them 
given over to minds unprepared. For, if a wall is spoilt, ifit is soiled, if the clear, 
sane language of the architecture is ruined by the introduction of inappro­
priate painting or sculpture, if the artist is unable to enter into its spirit or goes 
against its spirit, it is like so many crimes of deceit. 
There are two methods of applying painting. There is the purely utili­
tarian method; I was years before I discovered it. I have gradually observed 
that the great change in the modern technique of building has produced houses 
whose interior is surprisingly complex. This complexity of modern planning 
brings us into conflict with the classic square room of the past. Sometimes, be­
cause of the biological necessities of the plan, wall-surfaces, curved or oblique 
partitions are necessary, even if contrary to our desire for plastic purity- in­
trusive presences in the architectural whole. 
Leger has evoked the formidable dynamic power of colour. It is by means 
of polychromy that a thrill of excitement may be introduced into the house, 
a coloured epic, soft or violent. I have been engaged for a long time in defin­
ing the wonderful resources of colour; and taking advantage of the organic 
necessities of the modern plan, I saw that we could restrain confusion by colour, 
create lyrical spaces, bring out its order, increase its dimensions and make the 
spiri t of architecture rejoice. 
This is not yet painting. It is not necessary. It is architectural poJychromy. 
I can, then, when a wall or a partition presses down on me, burst them open by 
72 