THE PRINCIPLE OF ANONYMITY 
The engineering tradition of the nineteenth century was the last great 
English contribution to European culture. Though the epoch was founded and 
punctuated by great men who showed genius as individuals, its spirit was a per­
petuation of the mediaeval or eighteenth-century spirit. Within the sphere in 
which they worked, that of the application of science to civic and industrial ex­
pansion, they had the same unity of purpose as the builders of the mediaeval 
cathedrals. Further, their leading figures had the same versatility as the figures 
that established the artistic unity of the Renaissance: Telford was a bridge­
builder, a road-maker, a designer of harbours and canals; Brunei a designer of 
bridges, railways and of steamships; Stephenson of locomotives, railways and 
roads; Rennie of engineering structures of all kinds; Paxton, (perhaps the last 
of this remarkable line), of gardens, waterworks and conservatories, and an ad­
ministrator and financier as well. 
These were the leaders of this great epoch-the true architects of the nine­
teenth century, who created order while their academic brethren asserted their 
own confusion in argument about the merits of the Styles. And, what is signifi­
cant to our argument, for a time at least, a genuine tradition of design was 
established by them, again owing little to the creative ability of the designers 
but owing everything to the vernacular standards-this time of engineering 
structure- absorbed into their minds as a habit of thinking. For a time they 
established an unselfconscious engineering tradition of true cultural validity, 
pursued, by the mass of designers, anonymously. 
If we ask whether today we can restore this tradition of anonymity, and 
regain a vernacular architecture, I suppose the answer is that we must re­
establish first that unity of purpose- that settled continuity of social life and of 
the formal expression of it- which we have spoken about. An alternative an­
swer, of course, might be that we already have an anonymous folk architecture 
of our day: the mass-produced villas and bungalows that constitute the acres of 
suburbs surrounding all our towns and cities. In these the speculative builder 
carries on the work of his early nineteenth-century ancestor, with the same im­
personality and a similarly standardized vocabulary. But his vocabulary is an 
artificial one and a debased one, and his enterprise without civic consciousness. 
His products form no part of a socio-cultural whole. Modern speculative hous­
ing is a machine product organizationally but not culturally. Though possess­
ing some of the virtues of standardization and having escaped at least from the 
tyranny of the architect and his personality, it only serves, in its cultural insig­
nificance, to emphasize the cultural maladjustment of this time. 
187 