THE WORK OF THE C.I.A.M. 
only live if everyone who participates is actively collaborating. The direction 
of C.I.A.11. has constantly asked itself the question, 'How can it be ensured 
that none of the participants remains unoccupied?' The Congress cannot carry 
any passengers; every individual contribution is needed. 
In the autumn of I 936 at La Sarraz, the first consistent attempt was made 
to concentrate the work into small commissions. It was put this way in the 
letter of invitation: 'Experience has shown that full meetings are not very effec­
tive, they are therefore reduced to a minimum. The real work must be done in 
commissions. The national groups will keep in touch with the chairmen of the 
commissions and in this way closer contact and better results may be achieved.' 
The expectation was fulfilled, the amount of work done was increased in 
an astonishing degree, since every participant now shared in the responsibility. 
Discussions could with a few exceptions be carried out within single commis­
sions: nine of these were working simultaneously and thus results were achieved 
much more quickly. Particularly in dealing with difficult questions, such as the 
editing of the volume The Functional Town, which brought out differences in the 
conceptions of northern and western countries, a discussion on method proved 
particularly fruitful and penetrating for all participants. 
Everyone who attended at La Sarraz felt the friendly atmosphere which 
common work created. A young Belgian member who attended for the first 
time expressed it as follows: 'The sympathy, cordiality and mutual under­
standing of all the participants, the interest of the topics and the enthusiasm 
with which they are discussed all combine to make these meetings into splendid 
' 
opportunities for refreshing the mind, removed as they are from the quarrels 
I 
' 
I 
' 
which shake Europe and from the petty conAicts of nations, races and lan­
guages.' 
~ 
I 
The usefulness of the Congresses cannot be expressed in a quantitative 
r 
way. Each one of us needs this contact, especially at the present time, ifhis work 
is not to ossify or to degenerate into dead routine. Equally important for an 
objective advance is the human contact and the intangible strengthening of 
individual contributions through the atmosphere which the Congress creates. 
At the CIRPAC meeting at La Sarraz in r 936 the continuation of the 
publication The Functional T own and the arrangement of further Congresses 
were dealt with. The problem of 'The Functional Town' is to be dealt with by 
two different methods; first, by means of a 'popular' publication which is being 
prepared by the French and Catalan groups, and, second, in a 'large and scien­
tific' publication with reproductions of the available material, revised reports 
275 