• 
THE FACULTY OF ABSTRACTION 
stepping-stones that "c shall avoid getting bogged. Thmc stcppin~-stmws atl' 
of a solid materialistic or empirical n.lturc, but I t.umot stop to cksc 1 ibc them. 
But, in brief, the theory I ,,·ould support reg a t cis thil) f<t<. .. ult > of abstract ion as d Ul' 
to progressive stages in the usc of classification . l\ l,m, .ts .111 a nim.1l, is presented 
through his senses with a mass of phenornen.t. l\lercly to carr) on the business 
of life, to exist, he is compelled to arrange these phenomena in a ccttain onle1. 
At first that order will be determined by affective (emotional) reactions, and 
such is the classification of phenomena we find in primitive man. Evc1 ything at 
this stage of development is fused into one view, and superstition and (car 
dominate existence. Phenomena which we as civilized human beings regard a s 
discrete and, if connected, connected by explicable links, are for the primitive 
mind inextricably interpenetrated. L evy-Bruhl has called this state of mind in 
the primitive: 'collective representation'. 'Their mental activity', he says, 'is 
oo little differentiated for it to be possible to consider ideas or images of objects 
t
by themselves apart from the emotions and passions which evoke these ideas or 
are evoked by them. Just because our mental activity is more differentiated, and 
\'\"e are more accustomed to analysing its functions, it is difficult for us to realize 
by any effort of imagination, more complex states in which emotional or motor 
elements are integral parts of the representation.' (How Natives T hink, p. 36. 
The evolution of reasoning we may regard as the progressive attempt to 
divorce this emotional element from the process of representation. Over a long 
riod of trial and error, and ever driven on by the necessities of combating 
p e
tural forces (the so-called struggle for existence) mankind was led to make, 
n a
st a utilitarian or technical classification of phenomena, and then, as the 
fir
need for connecting or explaining such a pragmatic classification became ap­
parent, a conceptual or scientific classification. We have to imagine mankind 
as first forming a vast structure of pigeon-holes, into which he sorted the con­
fusing mass of phenomena presented by his senses; then as giving to the con­
nts of each pigeon-hole a general name or 'concept' by means of which he 
te
could refer to the contents. This name or concept is, in effect, a symbol which 
saves us the trouble of doing the sorting and pigeon-holing every time we want 
to speak about or think about the phenom ena in question. We must leave aside 
the very interesting problem of why a particular word should become the sym­
bol representing a particular set ofphenom'ena. 
The further, and final, stage of development comes when man a cquires the 
ability to manipulate these symbols or concepts without reference back to the 
actua l objects or phenomena which they denote. H e 'reasons' with the symbols 
62 