• 
THE DEATH OF THE MONUMENT 
and rcnc,,al and reproduction: processes'' hich an.: ptccisely the oppositl' o! 
pctnfaction. ~Ir Clarence Stein has explained the rich architectural ll.Hiitioll 
of the Balinese as due in part to the fact that they usc an C'\.cccdingl) imper­
manent volcanic stone -v\'hich lasts only about f1Jtecn years: hence thr} h,1\ c to 
renew their buildings frequently and rccarvc the stone, and this continued de­
mand for art keeps alive and active a tradition in the building and the clccor.t­
tivc arts. The glass and the synthetic materials used in our modern building..., 
arc valid symbols of this new attitude toward life: the avoidance of enc-rusta­
tion, the creation of an environment that shall be a product of the livin l{ and 
be responsive to their demands. It would be of course a foolish ""aste purposely, 
to design buildings which would collapse in fifteen years, so that they could be 
rene'"'·ed: a perversion just as foolish as the modern one of fashioning a motor 
car to go out of style in five years in order merely to increase the demand for 
production and profit: but it is wisdom to design buildings in such material<; 
and in such a fashion that they may be easily renewed and made over. 
This in fact is the greatest justification of the steel-framed structure, in 
which the internal frame can be made more strong than the outer shell, and in 
which the internal arrangements can be completely recast, by a flexible system 
of partitions. 1\IIies van der Rohe has made an essay in this type of construction 
in an apartment house; the late Jvfr Raymond Hood, with less fertility of in­
vention and less adroitness of design, made similar plans on paper. Mr Clarence 
Stein has created the flexible interior of a museum encased in glass. The fact is 
that modern architecture, based upon modules of construction, has yet to in­
corporate effectively in its building the great principles of flexibility-as well 
as cleanness-already achieved in the Japanese dwelling-house. £,·en in the 
dwelling-house, even in the business office, the architect still labours under the 
ancient shadow of the obsolete monument: he has still to utilize modern tech­
nics and the modern world picture in creating his designs. 
Does this mean that the modern city is to be renewed every generation? 
Does this mean that the city is no longer to be an accretion of the memorials of 
the past, in which the needs of the living are narrowly fitted in between ancient 
landmarks, whose value no longer lies in direct service, but in sentiments and 
piety? Yes to the first question, no to the second. The accretion of the past, the 
very mark of the historic city, with its successive stratifications of spirit, may 
well remain: but the preservation of the works of the past is not to be left to 
chance and accident; nor will the surviving memorial itself be endangered and 
diminished by being made over- no\Y with a system of gas lighting, now with 
266 