• 
ART EDUCATION AND STATE 
organization of the system of artistic training, the Stale must go deeper ir it d<'­
sires to restore the gifted artist to the sphere of practice. And it is in comH.'C tion 
with training that the practical possibility of its active intervention \\Ould to a 
certain degree appear to lie. The predominating question is, hm\ can those 
gifted with talent be sifted out from the new generation as a \.\hole, a" so to 
enable them to receive effective training? This would mean, in the first place, 
a general basic training in art for all, starting with the smallest child, follO\\Cd 
by special training as soon as necessary but as late as possible. \\'c need a new 
groundwork for all schools, a preliminary artistic training \- vhich differin{{ in 
degree according to the age of the pupils- would enable them to broaden their 
vision. The following trade training should as well undergo a certain reforma­
tion in its curriculum. It should not implicitly impart merely a knowledge of 
trades and specialized subjects, but also things which constitute the most 
essential condition of every kind of creative work, such as spatial perception, 
power of presentation, knowledge of materials and an understanding of business 
and industry, and the proper handling of materials and ordinary machines. 
The 'how' of the training is therefore primarily of greater importance than the 
'what'. If manual skill, the understanding for materials and the powers of ob­
servation and thought are first properly trained, any specialized training can 
be absorbed rapidly and without effort. As in the case of all attempts at a re­
formation, the State will be wise first to concentrate on one key-school, in order 
to determine what influence such a school for specially talented students would 
be capable of exercising on architecture, industry and handicrafts. For this ex­
periment it should get together the best teachers, give them far-reaching powers 
and leave them at liberty to discover in actual practice an elastic form of or­
ganization, because only in this way can a high level be reached. To maintain 
this level only a small number of schools of this kind for talented students will 
be possible even at a later stage, but the tendency of the training accomplished 
therein will be able to influence other kinds of schools for the artistic and tech­
nical professions and render them productive. In our opinion, less importance 
attaches to the nature of the organization which tradition and local require­
ments will evolve in these schools, than to <! homogeneous fundamental ten­
dency of the training in all schools in the country. This, however, can only be 
achieved by the gradual recruiting of personalities that the training in these 
schools for talented students will progressively produce. 
Whereas the ideal is to concentrate these schools for talented students at a 
few centres only, the State should-by extending all the existing instruction in 
240 