PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
already exists. The essential thing is that the fixed laws of the plastic arts must be 
realized. These have shown themselves clearly in non-figurative art. 
Today one is tired of the dogma.s of the past, and of truths once accepted 
but successively jettisoned. One realizes more and more the relativity of every­
thing, and therefore one tends to reject the idea of fixed laws; of a single truth. 
This is very understandable but does not lead to profound vision. For there 
are 'made' laws, 'discovered' laws, but also laws - a truth for all time. These 
are more or less hidden in the reality which surrounds us and do not change. 
Not only science, but art also, shows us that reality, at first incomprehensible, 
gradually reveals itself, by the mutual relations that are inherent in things. 
Pure science and pure art, disinterested and free, can lead the advance in the 
recognition of the laws which are based on these relationships. A great 
scholar has recently said that pure science achieves practical results for 
humanity. Similarly, one can say that pure art, even though it appear abstract, 
can be of direct utility for life. 
Art shows us that there are also constant truths concerning forms. Every 
form, every line has its own expression. This objective expression can be modi­
fied by our subjective view but it is no less true for that. Round is always round 
and square is always square. Simple though these facts are they often appear 
to be forgotten in art. Many try to achieve one and the same end by different 
means. In plastic art this is an impossibility. In plastic art it is necessary to 
choose constructive means which are of one piece with that which one wants 
to express. 
Art makes us realize that there are .fixed laws which govern and point to the use 
of the constructive elements of the composition and of the inherent inter-relationships be­
tween them. These laws may be regarded as subsidiary laws to the fundamental 
law of equivalence which creates dynamic equilibrium and reveals the true content of 
reality. 
PART II 
We live in a difficult but interesting epoch. After a secular culture, a 
turning point has arrived; this shows itself in all the branches of human acti­
vity. Limiting ourselves here to science and art, we notice that, just as in medi­
cine some have discovered the natural laws relating to physical life, in art some 
have discovered the artistic laws relating to plastics. In spite of all opposition, 
these facts have become movements. But confusion still reigns in them. Through 
science we are becoming more and more conscious of the fact that our physical 
45 