COLOUR IN INTERIOR ARCHITECTURE 
still others which-like blues-are perfectly suited to the office or the kitchen 
because they do not attract insect life. But beyond all this, colours will serve to 
bring out new perspectives, to reveal certain parts of the structural organism 
and to arrange, in the most rational way, the furniture, paintings or sculptures 
used in the interior of the house. They again provide scope for mural painting 
or sculpture which have, surely, as much right to live as architecture itself. 
Following my own experience, a good method is to treat all surfaces which 
do not receive direct light in white or very light colours; those in half light or 
full light will be treated gradually in a stronger manner. But each colour will 
have to respect the wall, its form, volume and purpose. This dynamic method 
leads us to the possibility of having several walls of different colours in the 
same room. This method (the results of which must always remain within the 
framework of pure architecture and never within that of decoration for its own 
sake) opens a vast field for the new application of colour according to the sen­
sitiveness of contemporary optics. 
T he neoplastic method proceeds in a different way. I t treats the same 
\-\'all in different colours r ah,·ays uniting them with greys, whites and blacks) 
while preserving all the time special character and form and even accentuating 
it where the architectural scheme demands. In this case I prefer to use pure 
and primary colou rs, yellow, blue, red, while the d_pzamic method makes use 
of the \vhole scale of kno\\·n colours and in addition, of those which the 
invention can produce. 
Contrary to the principle of the fashionable tailor or upholsterer who seeks 
to achieve a harmony by a fictitious arrangement called 'ton sur ton', what I 
propose is that one should follow the musical theory of dissonance and con­
trast. Through a voluntary, illusory discord of colours-appropriate to our 
epoch- one succeeds in creating a moving total, a living unity, a harmony 
which is vital and at the same time restful to the eyes. These theories oppose 
the monotony of monochrome interior architecture, they are against mono­
chord composition and they serve as the normal link for harmonizing disparate 
furniture. The architect is thus enabled to provide furnishing of wood, glass 
and metal" idely differing from the different materials of the construction. The 
colour may be obtained either by painting directly on the wall (oil, distemper, 
fresco) or through the use of plain papers, lincrustas, linos or rubber, or through 
the use of different materials and coatings fixed to the wall, in relief, or finished 
off in \'\'OOd, metals, glass, making full use of all that modern technique has 
supplied to the architect. 
213 