• 
Art 
' 
• 
PRAEGER PAPERBACKS 
CIRCLE 
INTERNATIONAL SURVEY OF CONSTRUCTI VE ART 
Edited by J. L. Martin, Ben Nicholson, N. Gabo 
This famous manifesto, which first appeared in 1937, has been unobtainable for many 
It is now reproduced, with a new introduction, for recent generations of 
years. 
students and for all those interested in the history and development of modern art. 
At the time of its original publication, CIRCLE proposed not only to bring the then 
to the attention of the general public but also to give their 
new Constructivist ideas 
major exponents "the means of expressing their views and of maintaining contact 
other.',' to provide a "medium for the interchange of ideas." From this it 
with each 
will be seen that the artists involved were not members of a formal movement but 
represented various tendencies that, when juxtaposed, were found to have important 
similarities, both stylistic and theoretical. Herein lies much of the book's excitement 
as a document and its undeniable significance for art history. 
In addition to the well-known editors, an unparalleled host of now famous artists, 
critics, and theorists-including Mondrian, Gropius, Moore, Breuer, and Moholy-Nagy 
-has provided written contributions, and their work is generously reproduced in the 
copius illustrations. With such an extraordinarily rich representation of active par­
CIRCLE can be said to seek and to arrive at the very essence of Constructivism. 
ticipants, 
The Editors 
J. L. Mart in 
Sir Leslie Martin, the son of an architect, studied at Manchester College of Oxford 
University, Cambridge, and the Leicester College of Art and Design. Sine<:! 1956 he 
has been Professor of Architecture at the University of Cambridge, where he is also 
a fellow of Jesus College. He was knighted in 1957. 
Ben Nicholson 
The English painter Ben Nicholson has earned a reputation as the outstanding non­
figurative painter in England. His works are in the collections of museums all over 
the world. 
Naum Gabo 
The Russian-born scu lptor Naum Gabo and his brother Antoine Pevsner are con­
the leading proponents of Constructivism. Gabo's work has been character­
sidered 
by his search to express a new reality whose principal components are space and 
ized 
time. 
A complete catalog of Praeger Paperbacks currently in print will be sent at your request. 
PRAEGER PUBLISHERS, Ill Fourth Avenue, New York, NY 10003. 