• 
PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
v-vork v, ill clearly show which of the t \\'O has predom in a ted. In general, 0\\ in~ 
to the complexity of forms and the vague expression of relations, tht: l\\ on <'a­
ti,·e inclinations wiU appear in the work in a confused man ncr. ,\1 thou~h in 
general there remains much confusion, today the two inclinations appeat mote 
1
clearly defined as t\-vo tendencies :jigura/iz e and noll-}i,f!,umliz·e mi. So-called non­
figurative art often also crea tes a particular represen tation; figurative a1 t, on 
the other hand, often neutralizes its forms to a considerable extent. The fact 
that art which is really non-figurative is rare does not detract from its value; 
evolution is always the work of pioneers, and their followers arc always small 
in number. This following is not a clique; it is the result of all the ex.istine: soc ial 
forces; it is composed of all those who through innate or acquired capacity arc 
ready to represent the existing degree of human evolution. At a time when so 
much attention is paid to the collective, to the 'mass', it is necessary to note 
that evolution, ultimately, is never the expression of the mass. The mass remains 
behind yet urges the pioneers to creation. For the pioneers, the social contact is 
indispensable, but not in order that they may know that what they are doing is 
necessary and useful, nor in order that 'collective approval may help them to 
persevere and nourish them with living ideas'. This contact is necessary only in 
an indirect way; it acts especially as an obstacle which increases their determi­
nation. The pioneers create through their reaction to external stimuli. They are 
guided not by the mass but by that which they see and feel. They discover con­
sciously or unconsciously the fundamental laws hidden in reality, and aim at 
realizing them. In this way they further human development. They know that 
humanity is not served by making art comprehensible to everybody; to try this 
is to attempt the impossible. One serves mankind by enlightening it. Those 
who do not see will rebel, they will try to understand and will end up by 
'seeing'. In art the search for a content which is collectively understandable is 
false; the content will always be individual. Religion, too, has been debased by 
that search. 
Art is not made for anybody and is, at the same time, for everybody. I t is 
a mistake to try to go too fast. The complexity of art is due to the fact that 
different degrees of its evolution are present at one and the same time. The 
present carries with it the past and the future. But we need not try to foresee 
the future; we need only take our place in the development of human culture, 
a development which has made non-figurative art supreme. I t has always been 
only one struggle, of only one real art; to create universal beauty. This points 
the way for both present and future. We need only continue and develop what 
44 