THE QUARRE L WITH REALISM 
For architecture, this equipment opens up a new field. T he word is with 
the architects, if I may be pardoned for saying so. The other day, my friend 
Elie Faure could state that, from an historical standpoint, in the time of stress 
the last word was with the architects. I think this is clear. 
T hus, in this era of construction, it is architecture which concerns us most. 
It will not bring us the delight of an intimate nature such as easel-painting 
could bring us; but it will put us in the way of a new life in which the chief 
factor will be the sun, nature, the cultivation of the body, the cultivation of the 
mind- a kind of new selection intervening in the human race. A new life-just 
imagine it- a life of splendour and physical and intellectual beauty. Another 
field open in world-consciousness. 
But what will become of painting and sculpture? I t would seem that these 
two major arts should accompany architecture; there is room for them there. 
Let me describe what architecture really is in these modern times: it does not 
consist only of our own works published in reviews; these are merely the ex­
pression of a carte-Jorcie, programmes of doubtful interest which, nevertheless, 
have allowed us to approach the study of man, his spiritual and physical needs. 
A new start from the very beginning-a sweeping away of ballast full of errors, 
deformities, academic sloth. What modern architects have accomplished 
hitherto is but trifling. I t has been all the same a successful revolution. 
If we attempt to visualize the great enterprises of modern times, we will 
fin d that certain aesthetic pursuits are out of date. Other tasks on a new plane 
are apparent. We are entering an epic cycle which makes its appeal to the 
spirit of art, of course, and for this reason, to intelligent artists; but of what 
transcending quality ' 
Certain painters and sculptors are speaking of it. I n order that the signi­
ficance which J a ttach to these considerations should not be misunderstood, I 
would mention that my best friends are among them, not by force of circum­
stances only, but because my ideas are fully in accord with theirs. Rather be­
cause I extend my ideas of architecture to the phenomena of general culture­
to those who express the spirit of a period. And the higher arts are the revealers. 
I know painters and sculptors well. I am not an iconoclast, as some would 
have it. I know the paintings and sculpture of the world because I have 
travelled everywhere in order to study them. I love them at heart and I live 
only by the comfort which they give me. This being so, I must confess that I 
speak here of a certain quality in pictorial and plastic art which alone has the 
right to intervene in the great architectural symphony of the new era. 
69 