• 
THE STATE OF TRANSITION 
does not depend on mass. In place of the rnassivc static- (.'fleet of the slotH' wall 
modern architecture makes usc of the dynamic effec-ts of the steel and rein­
forced concrete structure. In place of solid volume, it has intmducccl llC\\ 
spatial values.* In its unity of external and internal and by its integration of 
structural heating and venti lating systems, the world of separate effects and 
separate systems has been broken clown. The building is itself something in the 
nature of a living organism. The implications arc far reaching planning for 
air, sun and view-only the reshaping or the town can ensure that these thin~s 
are commonly available. The modern building is essentially a part of the town 
planned as a healthy working unit, not merely another building in a vast 
spread of the unplanned in which the occasional vista and the imposing 
revivalist fac;ade make a last despairing effort to 'keep up appearances). 
It remains only to add that the ultimate and final link between the '" ork 
of the modern architect (or the abstract artist) and the man in the street is 
neither so distant nor so impossible to achieve as we are apt to suppose. The 
work of the modern artist is not an isolated problem, but like all creative effort 
it is linked to powerful common experience. There is ample evidence from 
history to show that even the most abstract scientific theories had their origin 
in contemporary needs. I believe that the work of the abstract painter and 
sculptor is no exception to this rule, and the merely practical advantages of 
modern architecture are surely obvious enough. There is every reason to 
assume that as the rational utilization of the contemporary technique becomes 
more and more in evidence through the application of the principles of modern 
architecture, the need for its balancing counterpart in the shape of a heightened 
sensitiveness to form, colour and proportion will become all the more urgent. 
This does not mean that the aesthetic of the machine age will be far removed 
from the ordinary man. On the contrary, since it addresses itself to the sensi­
bility it is a question of feeling and not of knowledge and as such makes itself 
universally accessible. The response which the general public has shown to the 
machine aesthetic of the aeroplane and the motor car is one of the encouraging 
signs of the development of a deepening sensitiveness; the fact that the general 
public does not as yet observe the incongruity between its motor cars and its 
tudor villas shows exactly how far that development has still to go. But how­
ever far tha( may be, it is only through a common acceptance-conscious or 
*The means of achieving these effects is not, of course, now limited to the use of new 
materials. The revelation which the new constructional technique has introduced is in itself the 
source of a series of revaluations and a new exploitation of older and well-tried structural 
forms; the rejuvenation of the timber structure is the first example that comes to mind. 
218 