THE QUARREL WITH REALISM 
can the plastic arts be accommodated harmoniously in the architecture of today 
with a sufficient understanding of present reality? 
The question is important. It is a phenomenon profoundly organic. It is 
no longer a matter of combining painting and sculpture with architecture, as 
has been done quite happily sometimes at certain periods, principally in times 
of pomp and frivolity, from the Renaissance to our own day (you have a bad 
example in this hall- poor remnant of an art which is, moreover, full of am足
biguity). 
that we are entering on a period infinitely more serious, when we 
I believe 
shall no longer have the right to stick things on something, but when the pure, 
regenerating spirit of modern times will be expressed by organisms with a 
mathematical interior, comprising precise and inherent places where the work 
of art will be given its full value in exact accord with the potential forces in the 
architecture. 
Let me- as an architect- affirm this: architecture is an event in itself. It 
can exist quite independently. It has no need either of sculpture or of painting. 
Architecture provides shelters. These shelters supply a human need, from the 
dwelling to the building erected for civic, intellectual or mystic purposes, etc. 
I t has been customary for the last twenty years to assert that our houses 
require art and artists. Some would like to see a dining-room decorated with a 
basket of fruit painted or carved on a beam. I think that a good leg of mutton 
on the table would supply this want better. And here I stop short in the dis足
cussion. Give me your attention; do not let us bring the commercial system 
into this debate. The house requires lots of other things more urgently. I refer 
to the tradition handed down to us in prints or by other witnesses of the past; 
they show us life in the home at the time of the kings and of a luxury said to 
have been general. There was no decoration in the houses; people lived with a 
robust simplicity-proof of their moral wholesomeness. As to the luxury, it was 
often composed of very bad elements. The lapse of time and the patina alone 
have obscured things. After the revolution of '8g, they wanted to create a bour足
geois king; then a workman-king. Leger has spoken truly. It was not the fault 
of the artists; it is their education which was wrong. 
I think that painting and sculpture will find a place in architecture, starting 
again at zero, organizing everything anew, from the skeleton to the flesh. 
Loving this skeleton- architecture, which has raised up a real symphony by 
means oflight and the way in which this light illumines the walls, whose lyri足
cism is composed of things intensely real, psycho-physiological- this architec-
71 