SCULPTURE 
The perception of these differences, imperfections and perfections help us 
to understand the language the sculptor uses to convey the whole feeling and 
thought of his experience. It is the sculptor's work fully to comprehend the 
world of space and form, to project his individual understanding of his own life 
and time as it is related universally in this particular plastic extension of 
thought, and to keep alive this special side of existence. A clear social solution 
can only be achieved when there is a full consciousness in the realm of thought 
and when every section constitutes an inherent part of the whole. 
The sculptural elements have long been neglected and unconsidered, the 
form consciousness of people has become atrophied; bu t now much is being 
done by a more balanced and free education- a greater co-ordination between 
hand and head- that will keep alive the intuitive form perceptions of the child. 
A world without form consciousness would scarcely be alive at all. The con足
sciousness and understanding of volume and mass, laws of gravity, contour of 
the earth under our feet, thrusts and stresses of internal structure, space dis足
placement and space volume, the relation of man to a mountain and man's 
eye to the horizon, and all laws of movement and equilibrium-these are surely 
the very essence of life, the principles and laws which are the vitalization of 
our experience, and sculpture a vehicle for projecting our sensibility to the 
whole of existence. 
III 
The whole life force is in the vision which includes all phantasy, all intui足
tive imagination, and all conscious selection from experience. Ideas are born 
through a perfect balance of our conscious and unconscious life and they are 
realized through this same fusion and equilibrium. The choice of one idea from 
several, and the capacity to relate the whole of our past experience to the 
present idea is our conscious mind: our sensitivity to the unfolding of the idea in 
substance, in relation to the very act of breathing, is our unconscious intuition. 
'Abstract' is a word which is now most frequently used to express only the 
type of the outer form of a work of art; this makes it difficult to use it in rela足
tion to the spiritual vitality or inner life which is the real sculpture. Abstract 
sculptural qualities are found in good sculpture of all time, but it is significant 
that contemporary sculpture and painting have become abstract in thought and 
concept. As the sculptural idea is in itself unfettered and unlimited and can 
choose its own forms, the vital concept selects the form and substance of its 
expression quite unconsciously. 
liS 