• 
THE DEATH OF THE MONUMENT 
ground encroaches upon the cit), and the til], \\ith i1s dt'ttd l>uildi11gs, its lif't·­
kss masses ol'stonc, becomes a burial ground. 
So long as lllCll arc oriented lm\.tr<l dc.lth, the motnmH·nt has a nwaning: 
110 sacrifice is too great to produce it. Just ao, .1 poOl religious r~unily tod.t\' \\ill 
spend half a )Car\ income to celebrate fit)} the dcatiJ of Olll' of it-; mcmlwrs. 
money that it would find it impossible to spare to make possible the birth or 
education of a child, so the ci\·ilizations of the past sacriflccclthcir lii'C.· and their 
income and their vital energy to the monument. The pao,toral nomad alone 
:;pared himself that sacrifice, until he copied the "il) s of men in cities; IH; 
travelled light. Civilization today, for diDerent reasons, must folio\\ the c~~un­
ple of the nomad. For the most radical change in our modern cosmoc; has come 
about through our changed conception of death and immortall t y: fm· us, death 
is an episode in life's renewal, the terminus of a radical maladaptation: con­
tinuity for us exists, not in the individual soul, but in the germ plasm and in the 
social heritage, through which we are united to all mankind and all nature: 
renewal comes in the sacrifice of the parent to the child, in the ha-vin~ lived to 
the living and the yet-to-live. Instead of being oriented toward death and 
fixity, we are oriented toward life and change: every stone has become ironic 
to us for we know that it, too, is in process of change, like the 'everbstinl{' 
mountains: time is a bomb that will split the most august temple open, if the 
wanton savagery of men's swifter bombs does not anticipate time. 
The patterns and forms of past ages die slowly: the idea of surYi\·al has 
persisted despite the challenge of our modern world pictures: but the notion of 
material survival by means of the monument no longer represents the deeper 
impulses of our civilization. Indeed, one has only to behold the monuments that 
have been built during the last century to observe how hollow the notion is. 
These Valhallas and Lincoln Memorials, these \'ictor Emanuel :\Ionuments 
and Vimy Ridge Memorials, these 'Eternal Lights' which go out when the 
electric power station breaks down or the bulbs blow out-how many buildings 
that pretend to the august and the monumental have a touch of the modern 
spirit in them: they are all the hollow echoes of an expiring breath, rattling 
ironically in the busy streets of our cities: heaps of stone which either confound 
the work of the living, like the grand but over-crowded and confused Public 
Library in New York, or which are completely irrelevant to the liYing. The 
very notion of a modern monument is a contradiction in terms: if it is a monu­
ment, it cannot be modern, and if it is modern, it cannot be a monument. 
This is not to say that a hospital or a power station or an air beacon may 
264 