LIGHT PAINTING 
\\ ith the Sl'llS.ttion of' green, to )dl<m \\ith IJJue and SO Oil. ~l ienti(ic speCtl"lllll 
analysis 01 Goethe's e:-.;.pc• imcnts \\ ith coloured ~.;hadm's rl ',trl) demonstrate 
this. 
To be sure, it must be remarked that all usc or colour up to the ptt·scut has 
shO\\ 11 Certain minor Yariations in the USC of the COmplcmellll\1 )' l'Oilll ,\Sls Or, 
as we might also express it, complementary colour conlta"ts \HTC not used ac­
cording to purely physical laws in the historic periods or paintin~, but accord­
ing to individual interpretations. Certain colours, particular!) broken tone-.;, 
such as pink and grey, being mainly constructional clements cmplo) ed b) 
painters, took a very long time to sink into human conc;ciousncss. It \\as not 
only the religious canons of colour set up in the ~fiddle Ages which \\ere re­
sponsible for this, but also the development, step by step, of the po" er of ap­
preciating and differentiating between shades of colour. 
It would be the task of an Academy of Light to examine these questions from 
the historical, physical, physiological and other points of vie'' and to render 
the results available to all creators in colour. It looks as if an entirely new colour 
consciousness were coming into being at the present day. The principal influ­
ence comes from the Impressionists, who, as early as seventy-fixe years ag<"', 
were working ·with great intensity to purify complementary contrasts and ren­
der them more objective. They carried out their observation of colours in the 
open air in all kinds of weather or in the full glare of the sun, in great contrast 
to their predecessors "':ho had worked only in the light of the studios. 
V\'e know that the Impressionists (11anet, Seurat), studied the objectives 
aimed at by contemporary scientists and technicians and that they divined 
something of the great problems of the age of industry and the machine. Since 
that day the problem has become continually more complicated, and today, 
having given rise to much cause of conflict, it has developed until it has also 
become part of the artist's problems. 
1--Iany of the great conflicts of our age are to no small extent the result of 
the uncritical acceptance of technical results, which in many cases exceed the 
results previously achieved by individuals or are, indeed, directly opposed to 
these. Technical achievement ran rough-shod over humanity through auto­
matic production of all kinds of objects which had hitherto demanded creatiYe 
thought and individual labour to produce. 
Thus the spread of civilization and of the machine brought with it auto­
matized colour results which had not been digested by man and ,,·ere not sub­
ject to his command; and, by means of mass production, they are in command 
246 