THE CONST RUCTI VE IDEA IN ART 
world without the images of the outer one. The most that he could dare in such 
cases was the more or less individual distortions of the external images of 
Nature; that is, he altered only the scale of the relations between the two 
worlds, always keeping to the main system of its content, but did not attack the 
fact of their dependence; and this indestructible content in a work of art always 
predicted the forms which Art has followed down to our own time. 
The apparently ideal companionship between Form and Content in the 
old Art was indeed an unequal division of rights and was based on the obedi­
ence of the Form to the Content. This obedience is explained by the fact that 
all formalistic movements in the history of Art, whenever they appeared, never 
went so far as to presume the possibility of an independent existence of a work 
of art apart from the naturalistic content, nor to suspect that there might be 
a concept of the world which could reveal a Content in a Form. 
T his was the main obstacle to the rejuvenation of Art, and it was at this 
point that the Constructive idea laid the cornerstone of its foundation. It has re­
vealed an universal law that the elements of a visual art such as lines, colours, 
shapes, possess their own forces of expression independent of any association 
with the external aspects of the world; that their life and their action are self­
conditioned psychological phenomena rooted in human nature; that those 
elements are not chosen by convention for any utilitarian or other reason as words 
and figures are, they are not merely abstract signs, but they are immediately 
and organically bound up with human emotions. The revelation of this funda­
mental law has opened up a vast new field in art giving the possibility of expres­
sion to those human impulses and emotions which have been neglected. Here­
tofore these elements have been abused by being used to express all sorts of as­
sociative images which might have been expressed otherwise, for instance, in 
literature and poetry. 
But this point was only one link in the ideological chain of the constructive 
concept, being bound up with the new conception of Art as a whole and of its 
functions in life. The Constructive idea sees and values Art only as a creative act. 
By a creative act it means every material or spiritual work which is destined to 
stimulate or perfect the substance of material or spiritual life. Thus the creative 
genius of Mankind obtains the most important and singular place. In the light 
of the Constructive idea the creative mind of Man has the last and decisive 
word in the definite construction of the whole of our culture. To be sure, the 
creative genius of Man is only a part of Nature, but from this part alone derives 
all the energy necessary to construct his spiritual and material edifice. Being a 
7 