CONSTRUCTION IN SPACE 
ways the right to speak about them as things with a sculptural character. I will 
carefully try to consider these three main attributes to see if a constructi\·e 
sculpture lacks any of them. 
I. Materials and Forms. 
Materials in sculpture play one of the fundamental roles. The genesis of a 
sculpture is determined by its material. ~faterials establish the emotional foun­
dations of a sculpture, give it basic accent and determine the limits of its 
aesthetical action. The source of this fact lies hidden deep in the heart of human 
psychology. It has an utilitarian and aesthetical nature. Our attachment to 
materials is grounded in our organic similarity to them. On this akinness is 
based our whole connection with Nature. l\faterials and 1\fankind are both 
derivatives of Matter. Without this tight attachment to materials and without 
this interest in their existence the rise of our whole culture and civilization would 
have been impossible. vVe love materials because we love ourselves. By using 
materials sculptural art has always gone hand in hand with technique. Tech­
nics does not banish any material from being used in some way or for some 
constructive purpose. For technique as a whole, any material is good and use­
ful. This utility is only limited by its own qualities and properties. The techni­
cian knows that one cannot impose on material those functions which are not 
proper to its substance. The appearance of a new material in the technique de­
termines always a new method in the system of construction. It would be naive 
.::tnd unreasonable to build a steel bridge with the same methods as those used 
in their stone bridges by the Romans. Similarly, technicians are now searching 
for new methods in construction for reinforced concrete since they know the 
properties of this material are different from the properties of steel. So much 
for technics. 
In the art of sculpture every material has its own aesthetical properties. 
The emotions aroused by materials are caused by their intrinsic properties and 
are as universal as any other psychological reaction determined by nature. In 
sculpture as well as in technics every material is good and worthy and useful, 
because every single material has its own aesthetical value. In sculpture as well 
as in technics the method of working is set by the material itself. 
There is no limit to the variety of materials suitable for sculpture. If a 
sculptor sometimes prefers one material to another he does it only for the sake 
of its superior tractability. Our century has been enriched by the invention of 
many new materials. Technical knowledge has elaborated methods of working 
with many of the older ones which could never before be used without diffi-
105 
• 