PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
To return to the execution of the work of art, let us note that it must con­
tribute to a revelation of the subjective and objective factors in mutual balance. 
Guided by intuition, it is possible to attain this end. The execution is of the 
greatest importance in the work of art; it is through this, in large part, that 
intuition manifests itself and creates the essence of the work. 
It is therefore a mistake to suppose that a non-figurative work comes out 
of the unconscious, which is a collection of individual and pre-natal memories. 
Vve repeat that it comes from pure intuition, which is at the basis of the sub­
jective-objective dualism. 
It is, however, wrong to think that the non-figurative artist finds impres­
sions and emotions received from the outside useless, and regards it even as 
necessary to fight against them. On the contrary, all that the non-figurative 
artist receives from the outside is not only useful but indispensable, because it 
arouses in him the desire to create that which he only vaguely feels and which 
he could never represent in a true manner without the contact with visible reality and with 
the life which surrounds him. It is precisely from this visible reality that he draws 
the objectivity which he needs in opposition to his personal subjectivity. It is 
precisely from this visible reality that he draws his means of expression: and, 
as regards the surrounding life, it is precisely this which has made his art non­
figurative. 
That which distinguishes him from the figurative artist is the fact that in 
his creations he frees himself from individual sentiments and from particular 
impressions which he receives from outside, and that he breaks loose from the 
domination of the individual inclination within him. 
It is therefore equally wrong to think that the non-figurative artist creates 
through 'the pure intention of his mechanical process', that he makes 'calcu­
lated abstractions', and that he wishes to 'suppress sentiment not only in him­
self but also in the spectator'. It is a mistake to think that he retires completely 
into his system. That which is regarded as a system is nothing but constant 
obedience to the laws of pure plastics, to necessity, which art demands from 
him. It is thus clear that he has not become a mechanic, but that the progress 
of science, of technique, of machinery, of life as a whole, has only made him 
into a living machine, capable of realizing in a pure manner the essence of art. 
In this way, he is in his creation sufficiently neutral, that nothing of himself or 
outside of him can prevent him from establishing that which is universal. Cer­
tainly his art is art for art's sake ... for the sake of the art which is form and con­
tent at one and the same time. 
55 