THE CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA IN ART 
never have dared to take the naturalistic image of his famous Florentine 
pastry-cook as a model for the 'Holy Marie if he had not belonged to the 
generation which was already prepared to abandon the geocentrical theory of 
the universe. In the artistic concept of Raphael there is no longer any trace of 
the mythological religious mysticism of the previous century as there is no 
longer any trace of this mysticism in Copernicus' book, The Revolution of the 
Celestial Orbits. In the work of both, the earth is no longer the cosmic centre and 
man is no longer the crown of creation and the only hero of the cosmic drama; 
both are parts of a larger universe and their existence does not any more appear 
as the mystical and dematerialized phenomenon of the mediaeval age. At that 
time one and the same spirit governed the artistic studios of Florence and held 
sway under the arches of the Neapolitan Academy for the Empirical Study of 
Nature led by Telesio. This tie between Science and Art has never ceased to 
exist throughout the history of human culture, and we can discern it in what­
ever section of history we look. This fact explains many phenomena in the 
spiritual processes of our own century which brought our own generation to the 
Constructive idea in Art. 
The immediate source from which the Constructive idea derives is Cub­
ism, although it had almost the character of a repulsion rather than an attrac­
tion. The Cubistic school was the summit of a revolutionary process in Art 
which was already started by the Impressionists at the end of the last century. 
One may estimate the value of particular Cubistic works as one likes, but it is 
incontestable that the influence of the Cubistic ideology on the spirits of the 
artists at the beginning of this century has no parallel in the history of Art for 
violence and intrepidity. The revolution which this school produced in the 
minds of artists is only comparable to that which happened at approximately 
the same time in the world of physics. Many falsely assume that the birth of 
Cubistic ideology was caused by the fashion for negro art which was prevalent 
at that time; but in reality Cubism was a purely European phenomenon and its 
substance has nothing in common with the demonism of primitive tribes. The 
Cubistic ideology has a highly differentiated character and its manifestation 
could only be possible in the atmosphere of a refined culture. In fact it wants an 
especially sharpened and cultivated capacity for analytic thought to undertake 
the task of revaluation of old values in Art and to perform it with violence as the 
Cubistic school did. All previous schools in Art have been in comparison merely 
reformers, Cubism was a revolution. I t was directed against the fundamental 
basis of Art. All that was before holy and intangible for an artistic mind, 
3 