THE CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA IN ART 
result of Nc1turc it has e\'ery right to be considered as a further cause of its 
grm' th. Obedient to :\ature, it intends to become its master; attentive to the 
laws of Nature it intends to make its own la\\S, following the forms ofXaturc it 
re-forms them. \\'e clo not need to look for the origin of this activit), it is enou~h 
for us to state it and to feel its reality continually acting on us. Life without 
creative effort is unthinkable, and the whole course of human culture is one 
continuous eiTort of the creative will of ~ian. \\'ithout the presence and the con­
trol of the creative genius, Science by itself would never emerge from the state 
of wonder and contemplation from which it is derived and would ne\'er have 
achieved substantial results. Without the creative desire Science would go 
astray in its own schemes, losing its aim in its reasoning. ?\o criterion could be 
established in any spiritual discipline without this creative will. No way could 
be chosen, no direction indicated without its decision. There are no truths be­
yond its truths. How many of them life hides in itself, how different they are 
and how inimical. Science is not able to resolve them. One scientist says, 'The 
truth is here'; another says, 'It is there'; while a third says, 'It is neither here 
nor there, but somewhere else'. Everyone of them has his own proof and his 
own reason for saying so, but the creative genius does not wait for the end of 
their discussion. Knowing what it wants, it makes a choice and decides for 
them. 
The creative genius knows that truths are possible everywhere, but only 
those truths matter to it which correspond to its aims and which lie in the 
direction of its course. The way of a creative mind is always positive, it always 
asserts; it does not know the doubts which are so characteristic of the scientific 
mind. In this case it acts as Art. 
The Constructive idea does not see that the function of Art is to represent 
the world. It does not impose on Art the function of Science. Art and Science 
are two different streams which rise from the same creative source and flow 
into the same ocean of the common culture, but the currents of these two 
streams flow in different beds. Science teaches, Art asserts; Science persuades, 
Art acts; Science explores and apprehends, informs and proves. It does not 
undertake anything without first being in accord with the laws of Nature. 
Science cannot deal otherwise because its task is knowledge. Knowledge is 
bound up with things which are and things which are, are heterogeneous, 
changeable and contradictory. Therefore the way to the ultimate truth is so 
long and difficult for Science. 
The force of Science lies in its authoritative reason. The force of Art lies 
8 