A NOTE ON BIOTECHNICS 
creative work. Perfection is far more often approached by groping after it 
generation by generation; by virtue of intuition; or by the combined experi­
ence and reasoning of hundreds of different men. It is for this reason that the 
masterpieces of architecture are the expression and achievement of whole na­
tions, certain epochs or phases of society; and that their purely personal signi­
ficance fad es into the background. 
This abstract perfection of form is, of course, veiled by a whole sequence 
of different semblances, and exists only as an ideal. We have to presume that 
our own work is subject to errors, and that our technique is very imperfect 
compared to Nature's. But even in Nature a perfect co-ordination of form and 
purpose can seldom be found, Examples such as the beams of the Victoria 
Regia water-lily and the column of the bamboo are rare. Some investigators 
in the field of biotechnics, like the German professor, Raoul France, have re­
course to arbitrary explanations as to what was Nature's practical intention in 
evolving this, that and the other shape. But they cannot hope to explain the 
existence of hundreds and hundreds of variants among plants and animals of 
a single type. Why, for instance, should there be 6,ooo varieties of the uni­
cellular Diatomaceae although they live under identical conditions? \Vhich of 
all these thousands represents its perfect form? On the contrary, this infinite 
variety and multiplicity may lead us to doubt that single general law. In The 
Intelligence of Flowers, Maeterlinck has described very beautifully their dramatic 
struggle for shape, revealing secrets ofNature's workshop which are so intricate 
that they can only be fathomed by living in the closest contact with plants and 
as the fruit of prolonged observation. He gives us examples of trial and error 
and the evolution of properties by experiment that read like the deductive work 
of modern laboratories. He follows the growth and function of flowers, and that 
inventive activity of theirs while they are still striving to achieve their purpose. 
The correlation of form and function, and that isochronous coincidence of the 
two which so rarely appears in the works either of Nature or of Man, is a field 
for research still waiting to be explored. Among the many instances which 
R emy de Goncourt cites of how form tends to outlive function is the stag­
beetle, whose claws have now become a useless ornament. These may have 
been provided as a means of defence against an extinct enemy of which we 
know nothing. The persistence of form! Do we not know the force of this truism 
in every walk of life? From time to time we succeed in shaking off old forms that 
have become so much ballast or dead lumber. And yet at the same time we 
revolt against the new shapes that appear because they announce the form of a 
259 