52. YORKE A N D BREUER 
The amusement centre 
T he theatre 
streets, and above all, fewer street intersections. I t may, however, be noted in passing that the 
acceptance of the vertical type of development in this model does not imply that all buildings 
in any town should be skyscrapers. Apart from such considerations as different local require­
ments it should be remembered that the architects are concerned in this case with the inner 
centre of the city. In this model for example the only type of dwelling shov.:n is the block of 
flats. The private house in the centre of the city complicates immediately the traffic problem, 
the architects propose to place houses of this class to the outskirts, as an intermediate stage 
between town and country. These private houses would be arranged so as to allow a rational 
future town development; the roads which serve them could, if necessary, be adapted to the 
street plan of the central area. The rows of flats run north to south with windows facing east 
and west. There are no shadowed corners, each flat has a balcony garden open to east and 
west and the flat roof to the block provides a communal roof garden. The distance from the 
windows of one block to those of the block opposite is 240 feet; this space is either given over to 
playing fields or is planted with trees and laid out with lawns. All blocks are supported on 
concrete stilts, the space so gained provides a parking place for cars, below these parking 
places arc subterranean garages. Thus the flats lie immediately over the parking places and 
the garages below, a ll three being directly interconnected by li fts and stairs. 
Daily purchases can be made in the long rows of shops placed at the ends of the blocks of flats; 
the windows of these shops face the gardens instead of the main road which is intended purely 
for vehicular traffic. Schools, with their playing fields, are centrally grouped between the 
blocks of d wellings; specially ramped suhways under streets enable the children to reach and 
leave school without having to negotiate a street crossing. The main shopping centre forms a 
group of five double-storeyed premises facing on to a large public square. Its streets are a suc­
cession of terraces partly covered over and connected by sloping ramps. Escalators are placed 
at either end and the roof accommodates gardens, cafes, restaurants and places of entertain­
ment. The office buildings and administrative blocks are again 'island' structures separated 
by parkland. T wo different structural types are demonstrated, the smaller office block with 
central staircase and the larger· block with forked ends. Along the waterfront there is an open 
grouping of bathing places, cafes and a theatre partly situated on the slope down to the shore 
so as not to impede the view over the water. The model incorporates a new solution of an 
urgent traffic problem which allows street intersections to be crossed without periodic hold-ups 
by crossing traffic. An over bridge in one direction, forming an under bridge in the other, 
carries crossing streams over and under each other without interruption. 