• 
THE DEATH OF THE MONUMENT 
which attempts to preserve everything .Uld to sho\\ C\Trything, which mistake 
acquisition for .lppreciation, and ,1 knowledge of names and i11cid('llts lt1r .111 
aesthetic intuition, had turned the museum into another lll<'tropolis. crcati11g 
purposeless congestion, and complete intellectual bcwildcrnu·nt. On the nH·tt· 
laws of chance, something of value must accumulate in this dt;br is, hy llH'J t• 
reason of its extent: but in the ne\'\' museum, designed on a less acquisitiH~ pat­
tern, each generation should have the opportunity to be in control or the past­
with no duties tO\vard it except that ofliving in the spirit. 
The principles of flexibility and adaptation have another side: our distrust 
for the monumental does not merely apply to actual tombs and memm ials; it 
must apply even more to the physical apparatus of city life, in particu I at·, to its 
mechanical equipment. These, too, are capable of taking on a monumental 
character; indeed the Roman roads and aqueducts and se\' ers have survived 
at least as \veil as the Tomb of H adrian and the Arch of Constantine. The more 
the energies of a community become immobilized in such material structures, 
the less ready is it to adjust itself to new emergencies. A two-storey building, 
with small foundations, may be easily torn down, if a different type of structure 
or the widening of a street to accommodate a new type of traffic proves neces­
sary. But a twenty-storey building has a deeper foundation and a more elabor­
ate superstructure; it is served by a greater variety of expensive mechanical 
utilities, such as elevators: it is not easily removed: moreover the water mains 
and sewers and wired connections that serve such a building are all correspon­
dingly large and expensive: one does not readily tear such a structure dO\vn; 
and above all, one does not tear it down when it is to be replaced by a smaller 
building, or no building at all. 
It follows that every temptation to elaborate the mechanical shell should 
be counterbalanced, under a biotechnic regime, by the impulse to travellighr: 
to reduce mechanical equipment to the minimum, instead of permitting it to 
expand: to refine it, to adapt it more exquisitely to human ends: but not to 
permit it to dominate. The wholesale investment in electric street railways in 
the eighteen-nineties certainly retarded the development of automobile trans­
portation: it is very easily possible that our present investments in sewage dis­
posal systems, including special treatment stations and sewage farms, may re­
tard the introduction of some simple apparatus which will liquefy and trans­
form sewage locally, at a point before it leaves the premises. The economy of 
travelling light consists not merely in a lower capital outlay and a lo\\·er over­
head: its value comes also in the greater readiness to meet change. Small cities 
268 