PLASTIC ART AND PURE PLASTIC ART 
stract forms something particular, even without the use of figuration; through 
the colour or through the execution, a particular idea or sentiment is expressed. 
There it is generally not the literary inclination but the naturalistic inclination 
which has been at work. It must be obvious that if one evokes in the spectator 
the sensation of, say, the sunlight or moonlight, of joy or sadness, or any other 
determinate sensation, one has not succeeded in establishing universal beauty, 
one is not purely abstract. 
As for surrealism, we must recognize that it deepens feeling and thought, 
but since this deepening is limited by individualism it cannot reach the founda­
tion, the universal. So long as it remains in the realm of dreams, which are only 
a re-arrangement of the events oflife, it cannot touch true reality. Through a 
different composition of the events of life, it may remove their ordinary course 
but it cannot purify them. Even the intention of freeing life from its conven­
tions and from everything which is harmful to the true life can be found in sur­
realist literature. Non-figurative art is fully in agreement with this intention 
but it achieves its purpose; it frees its plastic means and its art from all par­
ticularity. The names, however, of these tendencies, are only indications of 
their conceptions; it is the realization which matters. With the exception of 
non-figurative art, there seems to have been a lack of realization of the fact that 
it is possible to express oneself profoundly and humanely by plastics alone, that 
is, by employing a neutral plastic means without the risk of falling into decora­
tion or ornament. Yet all the world knows that even a single line can arouse 
emotion. But although one sees- and this is the artist's fault- few non-figura­
tive works which live by virtue of their dynamic rhythm and their execution, 
figurative art is no better in this respect. I n general, people have not realized 
that one can express our very essence through neutral constructive elements; 
that is to say we can express the essence of art. The essence of art of course is 
not often sought. As a rule, individualist human nature is so predominant, that 
the expression of the essence of art through a rhythm of lines, colours and rela­
tionships appears insufficient. Recently, even a great artist has declared that 
'complete indifference to the subject leads to an incomplete form of art'. 
But everybody agrees that art is only a problem of plastics. What good 
then is a subject? It is to be understood that one would need a subject to ex­
pound something named 'Spiritual riches, human sentiments and thoughts'. 
Obviously, all this is individual and needs particular forms. But at the 
root of these sentiments and thoughts there is one thought and one sentiment: 
these do not easily define themselves and have no need of analogous forms in 
51 