ART EDUCATION AND STATE 
manual skill and drawing-make the general artistic training obligatory in all 
schools. This would be in keeping with experience gained from Froebel to 
and would bring the whole problem a gigantic step nearer to 
Montessori 
solution. 
I. GROUNDWORK FOR THE ART EDUCATION 
Principle: Each individual is originally capable of producing spatial forms, 
but the optical-spatial sense must be early developed. 
ISt Stage: Creches. Kindergarten. 
Modelling, drawing and painting in very free form as play, which is in­
tended to attract the child and stimulate its imagination. 
2nd Stage: Elemenlmy Schools. SecondaJ)' Schools. Public Schools. 
Awakening the creative substance in the growing child. l\1odelling and 
simple handicraft instruction for all kinds of materials in conjunction with free 
training in design. Bipartite but simultaneous instruction in manual skill and 
form perception. Modelling, building, assembling, free-hand and geometrica1 
drawing and painting throughout the whole duration of the training. I\ o 
no specimens, no elimination of the urge to play, i.e. no artistic tute­
schemes, 
The whole task of the teacher is to keep the child's imagination awake and 
lage. 
constantly to stimulate its desire to model and dra\v. 
II. ART TRAINING FOR MORE ADVANCED PUPILS 
3rd Stage: State and Local Art and Handicraft Schools. Schools for Apprentices in 
Industry. Trade and Technical Schools qf Lou·er and h~gher grade, including all 
kinds of Architectural Schools. 
Intensified instruction in design and handicrafts-duration about six 
months to a year-as obligatory preliminary training with a view to weeding 
out artistically talented pupils from all schools for training in the special 
Thereupon division into two courses of professional training, A and B 
schools. 
of the fourth stage. 
4Lh Stage: A (for pupils remaining in3rd-grade schools). 
Continuation of trade instruction in same schools, special training in 
manual skill for the trade selected, work on machines, technical drawing, 
works technique, costing, etc. Result: Trade workers for industry and handi­
crafts, industrial and architectural draughtsmen, works technicians, work~ 
foremen, handworkers. 
241 