• 
PLASTIC ART AND PU RE PLASTIC ART 
force of the individual inclination in human nature. From this inclwatwu mtstJ 
all the opposition to art lclzich is purefJ' abstract. 
In this connection we note first the naturalistic concrption and the dt lclljJ/­
ive or lilem1J' orientation: both a real danger to purely abstract a1 t. From a pun:ly 
plastic point of view, until non-figurative art, artistic expression has been natur­
alistic or descriptive. To have emotion aroused by pure plastic expression one 
must abstract from figuration and so become 'neutral'. But with the exception 
of some artistic expressions (such as Byzantine art)* there has not been the 
desire to employ neutral plastic means, which would have been much more 
logical than to become neutral oneself in contemplating a work of art. Let us 
note, however, that the spirit of the past was different from the spirit of our 
own day, and that it is only tradition which has carried the past into our own 
time. In past times when one lived in contact with nature and when man him­
self was more natural than he is today, abstraction from figuration in thought 
was easy; it was done unconsciously. But in our more or less denaturalized 
period, such abstraction becomes an effort. 
However that may be, the fact that figuration is a factor which is unduly 
taken into account, and whose abstraction in the mind is only relative, proves 
that today even great artists regard figuration as indispensable. At the same 
time these artists are already abstracting from figuration to a much greater 
extent than has been done before. More and more, not only the uselessness of 
figuration, but also obstacles which it creates, will become obvious. In this 
search for clarity, non-figurative art develops. 
There is, however, one tendency which cannot forego figuration without 
losing its descriptive character. That is surrealism. Since the predominance of 
individual thought is opposed to pure plastics it is also opposed to non-figura­
tive art. Born of a literary movement, its descriptive character demands figur­
ation. However purified or deformed it may be, figuration veils pure plastics. 
There are, it is true, surrealist works whose plastic expression is very strong and 
of a kind that if the work is observed at a distance, i.e. if the figurative repre­
sentation is abstracted from, arouse one's emotions by form, colour and 
their relations alone. But if the purpose was nothing but plastic expression, why 
then use figurative representation? Clearly, there must have been the intention 
to express something outside the realm of pure plastics. This of course is often 
the case even in abstract art. There, too, there is sometimes added to the ab-
*As regards these works we must note that, lacking a dynamic rhythm, they remain, in 
spite of the profound expression of forms, more or less ornamental. 
50 