THE CONSTRUCTIVE IDEA IN ART 
in its immediate inOuenee on human psychology and in its active contagious­
creation of ~fan it re-creates -:\Ian. :\rt has no need of philosophical 
n ess. Being a 
arguments, it does not follmv the signposts of philosophical systems; Art, like 
dictates systems to philosophy. It is not concerned "ith the meditation 
life, 
about what is and how it came to be. That is a task for Knowledge. Knowledge 
is born of the desire to know, Art deri\·es from the necessity to communicate 
and to announce. The stimulus of Science is the deficiency of our knowledge. 
The stimulus of Art is the abundance of our emotions and our latent desires. 
ence is the vehicle of facts-it is indifferent, or at best tolerant, to the ideas 
Sci
which li e behind facts. Art is the vehicle of ideas and its attitude to facts is 
partial. Science looks and observes, Art sees and foresees. Every great 
strictly 
scientist has experienced a moment when the artist in him saved the scientist. 
'\'\'e are poets', said Pythagoras, and in the sense that a mathematician is a 
creator he \vas right. 
light of the Constructive idea the purely philosophical wondering 
In the 
about real and unreal is idle. Even more idle is the intention to divide the real 
into super-real and sub-real, into conscious reality and sub-conscious reality. 
The Constructive idea knows only one reality . .:\"othing is unreal in Art. \\'hat­
ever is touched by Art becomes reality, and \\ e do not need to undertake re­
mote and distant navigations in the sub-conscious in order to reveal a world 
which lies in our immediate vicinity. \\·e feel its pulse continually beating in 
our wrists. In the same way we shall probably ne\·er have to undertake a voy­
age in inter-stellar space in order to feel the breath of the galactic orbits. This 
breath is fanning our heads within the four walls of our own rooms. 
There is and there can be only one reality existence. For the Construc­
tive idea it is more important to know and to usc the main fact that Art 
possesses in its own domain the means to inOuence the course of this existence 
enriching its content and stimulating its energy. 
This does not mean that this idea consequently compels Art to an imme­
diate construction of material values in life; it is sufficient when Art prepares a 
state of mind which will be able only to construct, co-ordinate and perfect in­
tead of to destroy, disintegrate and deteriorate. ~Iaterial values will be the 
s
inevitable result of such a state. For the same reason the Constructive idea does 
not expect from Art the performance of critical functions even when they are 
directed against the negative sides of life. \\"hat is the usc of sho\\'ing us what is 
bad without revealing what is good? The Constructive idea prefers that Art 
perform positive works which lead us towards the best. The measure of this 
9 