UNKNOWN COLOUR 
degrees but not colour. At moments of high vitality and keen perception the 
differentiation deepens with intensive power. 
know that there are many rays in light whose chemical action is 
We 
powerful, but which are not visible as colour to our eyes as they are tuned at 
present. It may be that in the future our eyes will develop to see ultra-violet 
and infra-red, but in the meantime we have to take them into account in our 
scale without seeing them. That is to say, that in thinking of the circle of colours, 
red, orange, yellow, green, blue, violet, we must not think of it as a finite circle, 
but as one where there is a gap of unknown, unseen colour, which comes in 
between the violet and the red, and is necessary to their harmony. Violet is the 
colour of highest tension, the colour only visible in its beauty at moments of 
high vitality and clearest sunlight. It is the difficult colour to use, and those 
artists whose primary interest is form always remain within the safe precincts 
of the lower notes of the scale, vermilion and blue with browns and neutrals. 
Those artists who have been interested in the potency of colour have always 
investigated violet- though they have rarely used more than a little of its sus­
picious magic. We have not yet learnt to correlate it to its unseen neighbour 
and beyond that to fire past the gap in the circle of our scale. \,Ye have then 
somewhat felt our scale situated somewhere between the orb of the sun and the 
retina within our eyes, closing and opening- closed it is white light, open it is 
the prismatic play of pristine colours. 
How has this scale been used? Hardly at all- as such. Colour was used as 
architecture by the old masters, as melody by the Easterns. 
The post-I mpressionists started to think scientifically. They separated 
colour into two halves as with a knife, and taking the two complementaries, 
red and green, or orange and blue, or yellow and violet and contrasting them 
one against the other, thereby very simply made light and darkness. 
Since then the development has been towards clarity in colour. 
The Neoplastic artists have taken the simplest colours that they could, the 
three primaries, red, blue, yellow-used them as fixed points and only them. 
Used their treble accord in counterpoint against the pairs of opposites in the art 
of shape- horizontal against vertical-mass against line-elevation against 
plan, etc., etc. The colours wait to be used further. The nature of abstract 
colour is utter purity-but colours wish to fly, to merge, to change each other 
by their juxtapositions, to radiate, to shine, to withdraw deep within themselves. 
For a long time they have been nailed down like carpets. 
Some people think that other mediums than paint will be discovered for 
59 