TH E FACULTY OF ABSTRACTION 
By Herbert Read 
ALL who have given any careful or consistent thought to the subject of so-called 
abstract or non-objective art know that it leads to problems of psychology and 
philosophy of the subtlest difficulty. These problems cannot be discussed in the 
normal course of art criticism, because in general they depend on the use of a 
philosophical terminology with which the general public cannot be expected 
to be familiar. The present essay, while not pretending to treat the subject in a 
manner satisfactory to the professional philosopher, will carry art criticism on 
to a plane which it generally avoids in this country. Indeed, I would say that 
the discussion of this subject, abstract art, has reached a condition of deadlock 
which can only be liberated by the use of ampler philosophical terms. 
We must begin with certain assumptions about the development of con­
sciousness in mankind. There is no space for a critical review of the various 
theories which have been advanced by anthropologists and psychologists, but 
I would venture to say that there is a general agreement on certain broad lines 
which will suffice for our present purpose. What we now know as intellection 
or abstract reasoning is peculiar to man, and only becomes evident in man at a 
relatively late stage of evolution. We do not deny that reasoning of a kind takes 
place even in animals, but such reasoning is always particular and con­
crete. 'It seems as evident to me', wrote Locke, 'that they do, some of them, in 
certain instances, reason, as that they have sense, but it is only in particular 
ideas, just as they received them from their senses. They are, the best of them, 
tied up within these narrow bounds, and have not (as I think) the faculty to 
enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.' (An Essay concerning Human Under­
standing, Book II, Ch. xi, s. I I.) 
This subject, as I have already warned the reader, bristles with all the 
classical problems of philosophy, and it is only by the nimble use of certain 
61 