• 
THE FACULTY OF ABSTRACTION 
V\'ith the growth of rationality and a logical type of mind, art tended to 
become more and more difTerentiatcd as an ac tivity. It \\as no longer, as in 
primitive times, an activity integral with life itself as accepted and as n.uur,d 
as any other practical activity. It became a specia lized activit y, appealing onl> 
to a minority. In the same way, reasoning or intellectua l ac tivity developed 
apart from the normal life of ma nkind, a nd became a spcciali.lcd activity .lp­
pealing to a minority. By the nineteenth century it was possible for a philoso­
pher like H egel to regard art and intellect as two distinct and incompatible 
elements in human life; and as an intelkctual, an exponent of the idea, to treat 
art as an obsolescent feature of life. And from his particu lar point of vie", 
H egel was right. This incompatibility between art and intellect does exist; art 
cannot become conceptual, an affair of symbols, an activity conducted without 
relation to objects. Art is always a perceptual activity, an activity of the senses 
in relation to plastic materials. 
That is to say, art must now as ever rely on \·vhat Levy-Bruhl calls 'the 
laws of participation' . For the artist as for primitive man there always exists a 
'mystic community of substance', a 'pre-logical' identification of thought and 
object, of concept and percept. But this does not imply that the artist must re­
vert to the primitive stage of mentality. The identification which is now re­
quired of him lies beyond the concept. That is to say, he must now reclothe the 
concept in visible and vital raiment. H e must accept the orderly universe of 
philosophy, the pigeon-holes of science. But he must make them real and vivid . 
In the place of the single concept, he must now put the single phenomenon, 
the work of art. 
I do not pretend that there is any one way of doing this. It seems to me, on 
the contrary, that we are at a stage of experimentation, trying in various ways 
to discover a new law of identification. I believe that surrealism, no less than 
abstract art, is engaged on this all-absorbing and all-important task. 
The surrealist believes, or acts as if he believed, that parallel to the develop­
ment of a conscious method of reasoning, there has taken place, below the con­
scious level of the mind, an organization of latent perceptions (images), and 
that what is required of the artist is the materialization of this unconscious 
activity. He would argue that consciousness, intellection and reasoning gener­
ally have not developed without unconscious compensations; that against the 
transcendental edifices of a K ant or a H egel we must balance the subliminal 
fantasies of a Lautreamont or a Picasso-just as, in another age, the theological 
system of a Thomas Aquinas was balanced by the imaginative structure of a 
64 