ART EDUCATION AND STATE 
Out of contradiction and affirmation, research and intuition, a principle 
has gradually crystallized which has spiritually permeated the technical age in 
which we are living: no longer must the isolated individual work continue to 
occupy pride of place, but rather the creation of the generally valid type, the 
development towards a standard. 
This was to be the principal aim of all modern schools intended for artistic 
and technical training, since, both from the cultural and economic aspect, its 
realization is of the utmost importance to the State. 
What can the State do independently of private initiative to bring the 
artist into closer contact with the life of the whole population, particularly with 
the practical industry? The role which it has to play is, indeed, a difficult one. 
I t must exercise the greatest circumspection if it is to prove of assistance in 
achieving the goal; in fact, the things which it must refrain from doing are 
often far more decisive than its active interest. Art needs no tutelage; it must 
be able to develop in complete freedom. The direction of art by public author­
ities, central supervisory organizations and laws are more likely to destroy 
creative impulses than to assist them. By its very nature, creative work also 
cannot be determined in advance; no one knows what direction its originator 
will take-often he himself does not know, because he creates out of the uncon­
scious. Therefore, the very most that the State and public authorities can do is 
to concur intelligently in the initiative which comes from the artists themselves, 
by supporting, benevolently and wholeheartedly, every attempt to stimulate 
industry and the public, and especially exhibitions. Such exhibitions are the 
appointed 'Cultural Exchanges' between the artist and industry. At these, not 
only can ideas, visible to all, be brought to the knowledge of the public in 
general, but the work of preparing the exhibition itself provides the first line of 
communication between the designer and manufacturer. During this work 
each can study the possibilities of the other. The more fundamental and homo­
geneous the theme of such exhibitions- if possible under the direction of one 
creative mind- the more fruitful the results will be. At the same time, a certain 
onesidedness can do no harm, and is even necessary for the sake of clearness. 
Artistic questions can, by their very nature, be decided in each case by the in­
dividual alone and not by committees. 
\Ve regard keen support of exhibitions on the part of the public authorities 
as being particularly helpful. Measures of this kind do not, however, go down 
to the root of the matter. Our century has been so revolutionary, and the con­
flict between tradition and new technical progress so great, that in the re-
239 