TOWN PLANNING 
definite is possible for society as a whole. Even revolution, involving as it would 
seem so much of decision for society, is powerless to distribute understanding 
more quickly than it can be made to move from a few spirits outward to the 
many. 
As in the materials of building so in the material of larger co-ordination 
there are economies that correspond with demand . Somewhere between gross 
waste and perilous dexterity there is a state of balanced tension, arrived at in 
the architect by an intuition, the result of a mysterious juncture of mind and 
body. This selection finally involves the architect in the whole fabric of society 
and binds him with life, for it cannot be made unless he understands the whole 
with the part, or at least the implications of the whole with the part, which is the 
immediate concern of his selection. 
H e sees that it is the rational and inevitable economy of contemporary 
production to use the machine with an ever-increasing knowledge of both its 
capabilities and its shortcomings, and translating the machine's power into 
terms of building for human needs he seeks the economic unit of building, not 
only in terms of the larger but within the smallest parts of it. 
What he cannot avoid in this is the desire for centralization as a means to 
unity, for unavoidably he sees beyond the range ofhis present limited activities 
the gathering together of great powers- at conflict with society now heavily on 
the move- but not out of scale with the mechanism of his architecture, nor yet 
with his own conception of what the whole might be in an idealized state of 
balanced tension. 
He recognizes in such a work as the Tennessee Valley experiment a move­
ment towards this state; the consciously planned distribution of power in a 
scale of adjusted economies related at each step to human needs. And he says 
that he is prepared to accept the outlines of this machinery as corresponding 
with the results of his smaller-scaled experiments because human needs and 
contemporary means appear to balance one another more closely here than in 
socialistic experiments elsewhere. 
If the religion of modern town planning is human welfare, its creed is 
mechanics. How otherwise could the Tennessee Valley experiment have been 
carried through in America, the most commercial of countries? All the legis­
lation needed was the power to make a thorough job of work in producing 
electricity by water power, and of distributing the benefits of this power over a 
wide area. But as its work proceeded it could point with sober logic to problems 
not exactly coming under the head of electricity generation but bound up 
191 