• 
THE CONDITION OF ARCH ITECTURE AND 
frsted it~clC gre'" almost ~ponta1wousl) ft om the habit of mind of their huildt'l', 
''hose creative rapacity \\'.-t.s e-xercised only in .l subordin.ttc -;en-;<', .dmo-;t as 
instinct. 
Though the architecture of the eig hteenth century "as IJ.t-;cd on an im­
ported mode, and though it \\-US the age of that anti-social being, the talt.'IJH·d 
amateur or connoisseur, it absorbed that mode into a genuine f(>lk .u t: no 
longer imported, but the natural- the only means of e:-.prcssion or genuine 
folk u..•ork. Though the stylistic form (\·vhich for our purpose is irrelcvant had 
1 
undergone a change, and though the social order was changing, this uni,·cr-;al 
tradition of the eighteenth century may be regarded cultura lly as the continua­
tion of the mediaeval tradition. In mediaeval times the anonymity and th e 
universality of the idiom-was even more characteristic. The impulse- or pur­
pose whose unity made this tradition possible-was a religious rather than a 
an emotional rather than a rational. 
civic one: 
In the case of the mediaeval period the whole social hierarchy was more 
permanent, and even the great, the original monuments of architecture ''ere 
largely conceived in the anonymous spirit. The centuries following had their 
Wren and their Vanbrugh, but its assimilation of the architect's disturbing en­
trance into architecture is the eighteenth century's claim to vitality-also its 
proof of proper cultural adjustment. 
The same spirit did not, however, disappear altogether when the nine­
teenth century's confusion of purpose brought a break in this unconscious ad­
herence to a standard. The architects invented the styles; the spread of popular 
education diffused them; but for a time the speculative builder preserved the 
tradition of unselfconscious building. The great building schemes of expand­
ing London-the Ladbroke estates, Pimlico, Bayswater, Camden Town; their 
equivalents in the provinces; all represent the last flowering (in the art of archi­
tecture labelled as such) of the anonymous spirit; though even these builders, 
lacking the assurance of their predecessors, lacked also the exact aesthetic 
andards-the subconscious selective judgment- that maintains the aesthetic 
st
quality of a folk art. 
During the first years of the nineteenth century, however, one other mani­
festation of this spirit showed itself. The great engineers of this period, engaged 
as they were in the active exploration of their newly discovered techniques­
iron and steam- had no time for a selfconscious search for style and no need 
the exploitation of their personalities. They found sufficient satisfaction in 
for 
the pioneer nature of the work they were doing. 
186 