• 
ART AND THE SCIENTIST 
and composition in art is a mixture of appreciation of {{eometrical symttwtrr 
and static compensation. To this must be added the quite clifTcrrnt d) namic 
balance "hich occurs only for movements, the balance of the bic) c le ride1 or 
the wheeling bird. How representational art, even in its most abst1 act form, 
can suggest this balance and through it the implicit stillness 01 motion of its 
parts, is still an unexplored field in the psychology of sensation. Here again the 
artist has been busy solving problems in practice for which the them etical 
formulation is yet largely wanted. 
The problem of content is a much more serious one for modern at t. In the 
earlier stages of revolt from nineteenth-century art, content was explicitly ne­
glected in favour of form. A certain choice of content was still made but it was 
formal objects, and particularly surfaces whose forms gave rise to problems, that 
were specially selected. The human figure remained because of the richness of 
forms which it could present, and, though not explicitly, because of its tradi­
tional psychological implications. Musical instruments, fruit, houses, machi­
nery were all taken up from this point of view. Another way in which the con­
tent could be formalized was presented by Constructivism, where what was re­
presented was essentially between forms such as occur in modern engineering 
practice, but with a strong tendency to geometricization and abstraction. Fin­
ally, in the later developments of purely abstract art the content is reduced to 
the simplest geometric forms, rectangles, spheres, cylinders and their positiYe 
and negative aspect, of which the abstract bas-reliefs ofBen Nicholson (Fig. 7), 
curiously reminiscent of the equally formal stonework of the Tiahuanaco cul­
ture, may stand as a fitting example. 
Against this tendency two different streams of reaction have grown up, 
both concerned with the apparent contentual poverty of abstract art. The 
surrealist movement depends essentially on introducing literary or psycholo­
gical content into formal compositions, but it is one in which the rules of com­
position themselves are no longer mathematical but psychologically guided. 
Surrealism also significantly draws on a field of content new to art, that of bio­
logical structure. Although for the most part it uses the cruder, more accessible, 
and consequently more emotive dissections of man or the higher animals, it 
does in principle open the field of biological science as a new source of pic­
content. 
torial 
The other type of reaction is sociological rather than psychological. The 
earlier stages of the revolution of the arts were essentially occupied in solving 
certain problems of presentation, but this modern artists are finding increasing-
122 