THE FIGURAL CABINET I. (First performance spring, 1922; second performance during the 
Bauhaus Week, 1923. Technical execution, Carl Schlemmer.) 
"Half shooting gallery - half metaphysicum abstractum. Medley, i.e., variety of 
sense and nonsense, methodized by Color, Form, Nature, and Art; Man and Machine, 
Acoustics and Mechanics. Organization is everything; the most heterogeneous is the 
hardest to organize. 
"The great green face, all nose, languishes for its vis-a-vis, where 
woman peeks out, name's Gret, 
she's got a blabbermouth and a swivelhead 
and a nose like a trumpet! 
Meta is physically complete: head and body disappear alternately. 
The rainbow eye lights up. 
"Slowly the figures march by: the white, yellow, red, blue ball walks; ball becomes 
pendulum; pendulum swings; clock runs. The Body-like-a-Violin, the Guy in Bright Checks, 
the Elemental One, the 'Better-Class Gent,' the Questionable One, Miss Rosy-Red, the 
Turk. The bodies look for heads, which are moving in opposite direction across the stage. 
A jerk, a bang, a victory march, whenever there is a union of head and body: the Hydro- 
cephalus, the Body of Mary and the Body of the Turk, Diagonals, and the Body of the 
'Better Gent.' 
"Gigantic Hand says: Stop! -The varnished Angel ascends and twitters tru-lu-lu. . . . 
"In the midst, the Master, E. T. A. Hoffmann's Spalanzani, spooking around, directing, 
gesticulating, telephoning, shooting-himself in the head, and dying a thousand deaths 
from worry about the function of the functional. 
"Imperturbably the window-shade roller unwinds, showing colored squares, an arrow 
and other signs, comma, parts of the body, numbers, advertisements: 'Open a Com- 
mercial Account..' 'Kukirol,' . . . At each side abstract linear figures with brass knobs and 
nickel bodies, their moods indicated by barometers. 
"Bengal illumination. Fips the Terrier sits up. . . . 
"The bell jangles. The Gigantic Hand - Green Man - Meta - The Bodies - . . . 
Barometers get out of hand; screw screws; an eye glows electrically; deafening sounds; 
Red. To end it all, the Master shoots himself - as the curtain falls -and this time success- 
fully." 