To each of these manifestations of light (which in themselves are already 
colored - only nothingness is without color) can be added coloring (inten- 
sifying) color. 
Color and form reveal their elementary values within the constructive 
manipulation of architectonic space. Here they constitute both object and 
receptacle, that which is to be filled and fulfilled by Man, the living organism. 
In painting and sculpture, form and color are the means of establishing 
these connections with organic nature through the representation of its 
phenomena. Man, its chief phenomenon, is both an organism of flesh and 
blood and at the same time the exponent of number and "Measure of All 
Things" (the Golden Section). 
These arts - architecture, sculpture, painting - are fixed. They are 
momentary, frozen motion. Their nature is the immutability of not an acci- 
dental but a typified condition, the stability of forces in equilibrium. And 
thus what may appear at first as a deficiency, particularly in our age of 
motion, is actually their greatest merit. 
The stage as the arena for successive and transient action, however, 
offers form and color in motion, in the first instance in their primary aspect 
as separate and individual mobile, colored or uncolored, linear, flat, or plastic 
forms, but furthermore as fluctuating, mobile space and as transformable 
architectonic structures. Such kaleidoscopic play, at once infinitely variable 
and strictly organized, would constitute - theoretically - the absolute 
visual stage (Schaubuhne). Man, the animated being, would be banned from 
view in this mechanistic organism. He would stand as "the perfect engineer" 
at the central switchboard, from where he would direct this feast for the eyes. 
Yet all the while Man seeks meaning. Whether it is the Faustian problem 
whose goal is the creation of Homunculus or the anthropomorphic impulse 
in Man which created his gods and idols, he is incessantly seeking his like- 
ness, his image, or the sublime. He seeks his equal, the superman, or the 
figures of his fancy. 
Man, the human organism, stands in the cubical, abstract space of the 
stage. Man and Space. Each has different laws of order. Whose shall prevail? 
Either abstract space is adapted in deference to natural man and trans- 