nistic effect of sound interrelationships is no longer a monopoly of poetry. 
It belongs, as much as do harmonies (Tone), to the realm of music, much in 
the same way that the task of painting, seen as color creation, is to organize 
clearly primary (apper~eptive)~ color effect. Thus the error of the Futurists, 
the Expressionists, the Dadaists, and all those who built on such foundations 
becomes clear. As an example: the idea of an Exzentrik which is ONLY me- 
chanical. 
It must be said, however, that those ideas, in contradistinction to a 
literary-illustrative viewpoint, have unquestionably advanced creative thea- 
ter precisely because they were diametrically opposed. They canceled out 
the predominance of the exclusively logical-intellectual values. But once the 
predominance has been broken, the associative processes and the language 
of man, and consequently man himself in his totality as a formative medium 
for the stage, may not be barred from it. To be sure, he is no longer to be 
pivotal - as he is in traditional theater - but is to be employed ON AN 
EQUAL FOOTING WITH THE OTHER FORMATIVE MEDIA. 
Man as the most active phenomenon of life is indisputably one of the most 
effective elements of a dynamic stage production (Biihnengestaltung), and 
therefore he justifies on functional grounds the utilization of his totality of 
action, speech, and thought. With his intellect, his dialectic, his adaptability 
to any situation by virtue of his control over his physical and mental powers, 
he is - when used in any concentration of action (Ahtionskonzentration) 
- destined to be primarily a configuration of these powers. 
And if the stage didn't provide him full play for these potentialities, it 
would be imperative to create an adequate vehicle. 
But this utilization of man must be clearly differentiated from his appear- 
ance heretofore in traditional theater. While there he was only the interpreter 
4 "Apperceptive" signifies here, in contrast to "associative," an elementary step in 
observation and conceptualization (psychophysical assimilation). E.g., to assimilate a 
color = apperceptive process. The human eye reacts without previous experience to 
red with green, blue with yellow, etc. An object = assimilation of color + matter + 
form = connection with previous experience = associative process. 