tendentiousness disappeared in favor of an unhampered concentration on 
action : Shakespeare, the opera. 
With August Stramm, drama developed away from verbal context, from 
propaganda, and from character delineation, and toward explosive activism.' 
Creative experiments with MOTION AND SOUND (speech) were made, based 
on the impetus of human sources of energy, that is, the "passions." Stramm's 
theater did not offer narrative material, but action and tempo, which, un- 
premeditated, sprang almost AUTOMATICALLY and in headlong succession 
from the human impulse for motion. But even in Stramm's case action was 
not altogether free from literary encumbrance. 
"Literary encumbrance" is the result of the unjustifiable transfer of in- 
tellectualized material from the proper realm of literary effectiveness (novel, 
short story, etc.) to the stage, where it incorrectly remains a dramatic end in 
itself. The result is nothing more than literature if a reality or a potential 
reality, no matter how imaginative, is formulated or visually expressed with- 
out the creative forms peculiar only to the stage. It is not until the tensions 
concealed in the utmost economy of means are brought into universal and 
dynamic interaction that we have creative stagecraft (Biihnenge~taltung).~ 
Even in recent times we have been deluded about the true value of creative 
stagecraft when revolutionary, social, ethical, or similar problems were un- 
rolled with a great display of literary pomp and paraphernalia. 
1 August Stramm (1874-1915) was a Westphalian poet and dramatist and the 
strongest of the members of the circle known as the Sturmdichter. His works belong to 
the early phase of Expressionism and are in a radically elliptical, powerful, and anti- 
syntactical style. His plays, Sancta Susanna, Krafte (Powers, set to music in 1922 by 
Hindemith), Erwachen (Awakening), Geschehen (Happening), seem today less effec- 
tive than his volumes of poetry, Du (You), Tropfblut (Dripblood). (Translator) 
2 Gestaltung was among the most fundamental terms in the language of the Bau- 
haus and is used many times by Schlemmer and Moholy in their writing, both by itself 
and in its many compounds, such as Biihnengestaltung, Farbengestaltung, Theaterges- 
taltung. T. Lux Feininger writes: "If the term 'Bauhaus' was a new adaptation of the 
medieval concept of the 'Bauhiitte,' the headquarters of the cathedral builders, the term 
'Gestaltung' is old, meaningful and so nearly untranslatable that it has found its way 
into English usage. Beyond the significance of shaping, forming, thinking through, it 
has the flavor underlining the totality of such fashioning, whether of an artifact or of 
an idea. It forbids the nebulous and the diffuse. In its fullest philosophical meaning it 
expresses the Platonic eidolon, the Urbild, the pre-existing form." (Translator) 