2. ATTEMPTS AT A THEATER FORM FOR TODAY 
a) Theater of Surprises: Futurists, Dadaists, Merz3 
In the investigation of any morphology, we proceed today from the all- 
inclusive functionalism of goal, purpose, and materials. 
From this premise the FUTURISTS, EXPRESSIONISTS, and DADAISTS 
(MERZ) came to the conclusion that phonetic word relationships were more 
significant than other creative literary means, and that the logical-intellectual 
content (das Logisch-Gedanhliche) of a work of literature was far from its 
primary aim. It was maintained that, just as in representational painting it 
was not the content as such, not the objects represented which were essential, 
but the interaction of colors, so in literature it was not the logical-intellectual 
content which belonged in the foreground, but the effects which arose from 
the word-sound relationships. In the case of some writers this idea has been 
extended (or possibly contracted) to the point where word relationships are 
transformed into exclusively phonetic sound relationships, thereby totally 
fragmenting the word into conceptually disjointed vowels and consonants. 
This was the origin of the Dadaist and Futurist "Theater of Surprises," a 
theater which aimed at the elimination of logical-intellectual (literary) as- 
pects. Yet in spite of this, man, who until then had been the sole representa- 
tive of logical, causal action and of vital mental activities, still dominated. 
b) The Mechanized Eccentric (Die mechanische Exzentrik) 
As a logical consequence of this there arose the need for a MECHANIZED 
ECCENTRIC, a concentration of stage action in its purest form (eine Ahtions- 
honzentration der Biihne in Reinhultur). Man, who no longer should be 
permitted to represent himself as a phenomenon of spirit and mind through 
his intellectual and spiritual capacities, no longer has any place in this con- 
centration of action. For, no matter how cultured he may be, his organism 
3 The phenomenon known as Merz is closely connected with the Dadaist movement 
of the post-World War I period in Germany and Switzerland. The term was coined in 
1919 by the artist Kurt Schwitters and came from one of his collages in which was in- 
corporated a scrap of newspaper with only the center part of the word "kommerziell" on 
it. A whole series of his collages was called Merzbilder. From 1923 to 1932, with Arp, 
Lissitzsky, Mondrian, and many others, Schwitters published the magazine Merz; and 
at about the same period the Merz Poets caused a great furor. The movement was char- 
acterized by playfulness, earnest experimentalism, and what seems to have been a great 
need for self-expression and for shocking the bourgeoisie. (Translator) 