lowed by portentous and dismayed silence. Another phase of the dance had 
all the formal and contained violence of a chorus of cats, down to the 
meeowling and bass growls, which were marvellously accentuated by the 
resonant mask-heads. Pace and gesture, figure and prop, color and sound, all 
had the quality of elementary form, demonstrating anew the problem of the 
theatre of Schlemmer's concept: man in space. What we had seen had the 
significance of expounding the stage elements (Die Buhnenelemente). . . . 
The stage elements were assembled, re-grouped, amplified, and gradually 
grew into something like a 'play,' we never found out whether comedy or 
tragedy. . . . The interesting feature about it was that, with a set of formal 
elements agreed upon and, on this common basis, added to fairly freely by 
members of the class, 'play' with meaningful form was expected eventually 
to yield meaning, sense or message; that gestures and sounds would become 
speech and plot. Who knows? This was, essentially, a dancers' theatre and as 
such, sufficient unto itself as Oskar Schlemmer's genius had created it; but 
it was also a 'class,' a locale of learning, and this rather magnificent under- 
taking was Schlemmer's tool of instruction. . . . 
"Indeed it was a treat to watch the precision, aplomb, the power and the 
delicacy of action. His language, too, although unable to assume command, 
was an expressive tool. His was the most personal vocabulary I have ever 
known. His invention of metaphors was inexhaustible; he loved unaccus- 
tomed juxtapositions, paradoxical alliterations, baroque hyperbole. The sa- 
tirical wit of his writings is quite untranslatable." 
Schlemmer's unorthodox approach to the phenomenon of creation, 
which expected form to yield meaning, has recently found an eloquent ad- 
vocate in Sir Herbert Read, the English poet and art critic. He has devoted his 
book Icon and ldea to the question whether "image" or "thought" initiates a 
new phase of development in human history. He comes to the conclusion that 
it may well be that the formative artist receives the first message from beyond 
the threshold of knowledge, which is then interpreted by the thinker, the 
philosopher. 
My own great impression of Schlemmer's stage work was to see and 
experience his magic of transforming dancers and actors into moving archi- 
tecture. His deep interest and intuitive understanding of the phenomena of 
architectural space developed also his rare gift as a muralist. With empathy 
he would sense the directions and dynamics of a given space and make them 