artificial limbs developed by surgery, the fantastic costumes of the deep-sea 
diver and the modern soldier, and so forth. . . . 
Conseqziently, potentialities of constructive configuration are extra- 
ordinary on the metaphysical side as well. 
The artificial human figure (Kunstfigur) permits any kind of movement 
and any kind of position for as long a time as desired. It also permits - an 
artistic device from the periods of greatest art - a variable relative scale 
for figures : important ones can be large, unimportant ones small. 
An equally significant aspect of this is the possibility of relating the 
figure of natural "naked Man to the abstract figure, both of which experi- 
ence, through this confrontation, an intensification of their peculiar natures. 
Endless perspectives are opened up: from the supernatural to the non- 
sensical, from the sublime to the comic. Precursors in the use of pathos, of 
the sublime, are the actors of ancient tragedy, monumentalized by means of 
masks, cothurni, and stilts. Precursors in the comic style are the gigantic 
and the grotesque figures of carnival and fair. 
Wondrous figures of this new sort, personifications of the loftiest con- 
cepts and ideas, made of the most exquisite material, will be capable also of 
embodying symbolically a new faith. 
Seen from this perspective, it might even be predicted that the situation 
will completely reverse itself: the stage designer will develop optical phe- 
nomena and will then seek out a poet who will give them their appropriate 
language through words and musical sounds. 
And so, in accordance with idea, style, and technology, the following still 
await their creation: 
the Abstract-Formal and Color 
the Static, Dynamic, and Tectonic 
the Mechanical, Automatic, and Electric 
the Gymnastic, Acrobatic, and Equilibristic 
' Theater 
the Comic, Grotesque, and Burlesque 
the Serious, Sublime, and Monumental 
the Political, Philosophical, and Metaphysical 
, 
Utopia? It is indeed astonishing how little has been accomplished so far in 
this direction. This materialistic and practical age has in fact lost the genuine 