Finally, to finish off this pre-war period, it only remains for me to mention the last
Salon des Indépendants of 1914, where we continued to show important works,
among them those of Robert Delaunay - Disques Simultanés, which I will talk about
in a moment.
What has happened to the works I have just been quoting? Most of them can be
found in museums and collections in Germany. The rest are scattered. There are some
in France, others in America, in Russia, in Spain - circumstances have not allowed us
to keep track of them. So, since, by the all-powerful will of commerce which has
become master of the world, they are unable to appear regularly in the public sales,
they have been forgotten or ignored. How interesting it would be to bring them
together some day, to show them once again to the public! The passage of the years
would allow us a better understanding of them, and thus of the history of modern
painting. They would soon put back into their proper place the parasites by whom it
has, for the moment, been falsified.
 
ROBERT DELAUNAY - THE 'DENOUEMENT' OF CUBISM
So, between 1911 and 1914, Cubism evolved from the notion of form based on
volume to the notion of cinematic form which breaks, once and for all, the
perspective unity of the Renaissance.
Robert Delaunay even had the intuition of a synthetic form which would replace the
form which remains static and fragmentary, whether it is shown in perspective unity
or in a multiplicity of points of view. Of course he is still in space, he is still too
visual, of that there is no doubt; he is too much dominated by the play of sensory
impressions but, nonetheless, he suspects the existence of something new; he begins
to touch it, he proclaimed it aloud in his Disques Simultanés. And that seems to me
to be profoundly moving nowadays, when I believe that I have good reasons for
understanding what I could not grasp then. In saying this, I shall probably surprise
many people who think of Robert Delaunay as he is today, once again seduced by the
descriptive image. So much the worse for them if they cannot recognise that
Delaunay in 1913 announced the end to which Cubism was working. As for myself, I
admit that the more I deepen my understanding of the problem of form posed
categorically by Cubism in 1911, the more Delaunay's work reveals its worth. And
that is why I conclude, freely, that among all of us at that time, it was he, sustained
solely by gifts of the first order and by his own abundant high spirits, who came
closest to the truth.
Behind that exuberance of colour, beneath this fondness for monotonous discs,
beyond all that vulgar modernism, there was the longing for heaven, for what
Mallarmé calls l'azur; the vision of plasticity in time, complete, definitive, circular,
astronomical. Delaunay played with suns and moons like an amazed child. And I am
delighted now to be able to find this work already established behind us, incomplete
perhaps, but nonetheless big with the future because it was free-spirited and
adventurous.
What Delaunay had to contribute could not, at that time, have been used by anyone
other than himself. He was ahead of his time because he had no reason for restraint.
To open the window to let the light flood in was a reckless thing to do. Immediately
the representational elements of the analysis of form were consumed and a new form,
unknown and still, for the rest of us, inadmissible, began to turn, freely. The
immobile had been changed to mobility.
We were still attached to the representational image. We cut into the form, the
different angles from which it could be seen, the perspective. The object turned in our
hands, we turned round it. We were tortured by this mystery of form. Delaunay had