Painting is always subject to and determined by the needs of architecture.
Architecture is the exact expression of the cast of mind of the age. It is by studying
architecture that we can trace the evolution of a human cycle and understand its
biological constants. Since nothing in the social organism ever disappears but
everything is in continual change according to where it is placed in the cycle of its
growth, we can say that, when the esemplastic consciousness of the surrounding
world is determined by architecture, then painting, consciously subject to it, is
decorative. By contrast, when architecture begins to decline, indicating a decline in
the esemplastic power of the world as a whole, painting, by a process of repercussion,
breaking free from the order that is collapsing, delivered up to its own devices,
becomes the picture.
Similar changes take place in the fields of dance, music, poetry, literature taken as a
whole, sculpture and, in the art of furniture, using the term in its widest possible
sense. We can see it at work in the Christian cycle just as we can throughout the
whole history of the numerous cycles that are known to us. The Renaissance marked
a decisive moment in the separation of two casts of mind corresponding to two
essential periods of life: the one had risen from birth to adulthood, the other was to
descend from adulthood to death - the first was organic, the second was destined to
become disorganised and disarticulated through the illusion that liberty was being
accorded to each of its individual parts.
It is easy, in the world of humanity at the present time, to see the signs of that organic
incoherence which is the prelude to the end that all aging biological systems have to
undergo. But with some small degree of perspicacity, it is also possible to see a
tendency towards coherence, which could be the sign that a new social reorganisation
is taking place. In that field of human activity which has given birth to Cubism, I see
definite signs of the renewal of what used to be called 'great decorative painting'. A
productive activity undertaken for reasons that were merely aesthetic is beginning
once again to discover those technical means which are the indispensable
precondition for a real esemplastic act. Descriptive painting is beginning to give way
to the living wall.
Not many painters could continue in this almost unbearable situation in which the
spirit of generalisation was struggling with the spirit of particularity - a particularity
which attributed a quite ridiculous degree of importance to the individual. A reaction
set in which included painters who, while still trying to attract as much publicity to
themselves as possible, disappeared entirely into the obscurity of a private code (20).
But it also included certain painters who had started out as Cubists but who, unable to
break free of an old prejudice, fell back (are they aware of the fact?) into the state of
indecision that characterised the work of Cézanne.
But what is there that is so terrible about decorative painting? Is it because its
freedom is ordered, because it has a structure? And, as a result, is the individual who
is so taken with himself, afraid that he will be shown up clearly, in the full light of
day? The chief characteristic of decorative painting is, of course, the very great
quantity of means that are developed as a direct result of the technique employed.
The plastic results are determined by the technique. As we can see straightaway, it is
not a matter of describing, nor is it a matter of abstracting from, anything that is
external to itself. There is a concrete act that has to be realised, a reality to be
produced - of the same order as that which everyone is prepared to recognise in
music, at the lowest level of the esemplastic scale, and in architecture, at the highest
(21). Like any natural, physical reality, painting, understood in this way, will touch
anyone who knows how to enter into it, not through their opinions on something that
exists independently of it, but through its own existence, through those inter-
relations, constantly in movement, which enable us to transmit life itself.