something exceptional once the new order that is coming begins to look for its heroes
in the order that exists today - when, its reign having begun, it will search for its
antecedents in an earlier age.
The canvasses themselves, moreover - those which provoked the scandals and also
the courageous defence - will be there to witness better still, through their own act,
that something was being born. Once time has produced an accurate understanding of
the period, permitting only that which was truly solid, capable of resisting its
influence, to remain, then to each will be rendered according to his works. Then we
will know which were the truly great works of the age that is passing - the works that
are at present being covered in silence through the combined efforts of a fickle
virtuosity (8) and financial interest.
So that they will be remembered, I will recall that to the Salon des Indépendants of
1912 Metzinger sent La Femme au Cheval, Léger a Groupe de Personnages, Le
Fauconnier a sketch for Le Chasseur, Delaunay his immense Ville de Paris, myself
Les Baigneuses. To the Salon d'Automne the same year, Metzinger Au Café Concert,
Léger La Femme en Bleu, Le Fauconnier Les Chasseurs, myself L'Homme au
Balcon; it was also during the winter of 1912 that the Exhibition of the Section d'Or
took place, the most important specialist exhibition of that time, which brought
together the best values of that generation, all of whom had agreed to be shown under
the sign of Cubism. At this same moment, Jean Metzinger and myself, trying to put a
little order into the chaos of everything that had been written in the papers and
reviews since 1911, published the first book on Cubism - Du "Cubisme', published
by Figuière in Paris. A little later, Guillaume Apollinaire published a study of the
new painting in which the real substance of the problem was rather buried under a
combination of good will and poetic talent - Méditations Esthétiques, Les Peintres
Cubistes - also with Figuière.
 
1913/14
The year 1913 saw the movement continuing to evolve. The changes it had already
undergone since the Indépendants of 1911 could leave people in no doubt as to its
nature. Cubism was not a school, distinguished by some superficial variation on a
generally accepted norm. It was a total regeneration, indicating the emergence of a
wholly new cast of mind. Every season it appeared renewed, growing like a living
body. Its enemies could, eventually, have forgiven it if only it had passed away, like a
fashion; but they became even more violent when they realised that it was destined to
live a life that would be longer than that of those painters who had been the first to
assume the responsibility for it.
At the 1913 Salon des Indépendants could be seen a very large work of Jean
Metzinger's - L'Oiseau Bleu; L'Equipe de Cardiff from Robert Delaunay; two
important canvasses from Léger; still lifes and L'Homme au Café from Juan Gris;
enthusiastic new work from La Fresnaye and from Marcoussis, and from others
again; and finally, from myself, Les Joueurs de Football.
Again, to the Salon d'Automne of 1913 - a salon in which Cubism was now the
predominating tendency - Metzinger sent the great picture called En Bâteau, La
Fresnaye La Conquête de l'Air, myself Les Bâteaux de Pêche and La Ville et le
Fleuve. If the first moment of surprise had passed by, the interest Cubism excited was
as great as ever. The anger and the enthusiasm had not changed sides, our enemies
held to their guns. It is enough for proof to read the diatribes of Louis Vauxcelles in
Gil Blas for that year,1913, and the panegyrics of Guillaume Apollinaire in
L'Intransigeant.