of those absurd non-sequiturs that are so characteristic of our time, everyone was full
of praises for the great ages of art - ages which were dominated by architecture, and
whose painting and sculpture were therefore entirely decorative; but this was not
enough to persuade them that their scorn for decorative painting was merely a matter
of habit. And I think they are still quite unconscious of the contribution they have
made towards the return of an order that has once again become necessary, and that
this is the reason why, by anticipation, they are great,
 
CUBISM AS A POPULAR ART
The commercial interests of the time understood it better than they. Only because
commerce - in what is in it that is most general and, consequently, most necessary - is
addressed not to a so-called chosen élite, but to the widest possible human public. So
it could see all the benefits it could obtain from the means that had been developed in
response to the technical problem. It saw how the imagination of the masses could be
seized by the wonderful appeal of new forms. So, necessarily, it adopted Cubism both
in its intentions and in its technique. Today, while everyone continues to abuse Cubist
painting, declaring it to have been a terrible mistake, they are all, everywhere, agreed
in recognising that 'the aesthetic current that has transformed contemporary taste,
was born in the context of proper artistic painting, though it really had nothing to do
with it. Cubism is, in fact, at the origin of the whole of the modern style. But in the
context of pure art, it is an obvious nonsense.' I take this quotation at random from a
provincial newspaper where I read it recently - Lyon Républicain, 9th February 1928
- but it is the leitmotif that can be heard everywhere as soon as the aesthetics of what
is called` 'the modern' is under discussion. Thus, although they are compelled to
admit what is blindingly obvious, they insist that what was the cause of it all was
only a mistake. They drew a distinction between 'art', presented without any
qualification, and that specialised field which is called 'pure art'; in other words, the
life of the whole - real, popular life - is not true life. It is the negation of true life.
So. In all the various initiatives that are being undertaken wherever large scale
commerce exercises its influence, Cubist painting is the only sort that can hold its
own. The modern decorators are not yet fully conscious of the fact. But once an
architect appears with sufficient spiritual force to again become the master of the
whole work that he was in the past (and he will appear sooner or later, the age, whose
whole cast of mind is in disarray, is already carrying the seed) he cannot, without
compromising the unity of his idea, do other than to turn to the Cubist painters if he
wants to introduce painting. So we can conclude that Cubism has broken through the
barrier that was put up between art and that sort of painting that claimed to be more
pure - easel painting. If there has been a mistake, it is a mistake on the part of those
who still do not understand that, already, in the renewal of contemporary taste, the
western world, wanting to renew its life, is beginning to change its cast of mind, the
very shape of its way of thinking.
 
CONCLUSION - THE DECORATIVE ARTS EXHIBITION, 1925
Such have been, up to the present day, the great changes undergone by what, around
seventeen years ago, was called Cubism. The men whose names I have given did not,
at that time, see the great importance of what they were trying to do; even less had
they any notion of the consequences this effort would have, or that, in the end, it
would escape out of their control.
Cubism, then, was not an exceptional event in the more or less continuous curve of
the history of painting. Plenty of writers have tried to explain it, justifying it, or
declaring it to be undesirable, according to their own particular fancy. Too much