which brought a blush to the cheeks of the spirit of civilisation. After seeing them,
and liking them, Cubism was not ashamed to, itself, assume appearances which the
world about it considered to be monstrous. So, for some, it was through the old
image-makers of the period before the thirteenth century and, for others, it was
through negro sculpture, that their work was able to acquire such a very profoundly
human character.
That was where all the researches began - in that transformation of the old way of
looking at things. The Cubists were not the only ones who found those ages that had
been denigrated by the academies passionately moving, since this passion is still the
distinct, distinguishing characteristic of our whole generation. We are often unjust in
the attitudes we adopt towards the Romantics, but nothing can change the fact that it
is because of them that we know something other than what the official teaching,
soaked in the slogans of the Renaissance, was capable of giving us.
There you have a brief indication of the antecedents of Cubism. In its origins it was
readily confused with the general tendencies of its generation, but the moment is not
far off when it will assume the leadership, when it will go beyond the level of mere
appearances and will oblige what is still just an intellectual admiration for past ages
to turn into a practical knowledge of principles that cannot be changed. It will act not
just on painters, sculptors and architects, but on the world as a whole at the widest
and most general level.
 
THE PUBLIC SCANDAL OF CUBISM, 1911
It was at the Salon des Indépendants in Paris in 1911 that, for the first time, the public
was confronted with a collection of paintings which still did not have any label
attached to them. I know that, in saying that, I am going against the generally
accepted legend but the truth requires that it be said.
I have in front of me a small cutting from an evening newspaper, The Press, on the
subject of the 1910 Salon d'Automne. It gives a good idea of the situation in which
the new pictorial tendency, still barely perceptible, found itself: 'The geometrical
fallacies of Messrs. Metzinger, Le Fauconnier, and Gleizes'. No sign of any
compromise there. Braque and Picasso only showed in Kahnweiler's gallery and we
were unaware of them (3). Robert Delaunay, Metzinger and Le Fauconnier had been
noticed at the Salon des Indépendants of that same year, 1910, without a label being
fixed on them. Consequently, although much effort has been put into proving the
opposite, the word Cubism was not at that time current (4).
Things speeded up in 1911, and the nature and importance of the crisis that painting
was entering into began to be seen more clearly. Room 41 of the Salon des
Indépendants was a revelation for everyone. There was no-one who did not feel its
power. It struck the imagination as an element which has been disturbed can astonish
and produce a feeling of anguish without necessarily being understood. These
canvasses in a dull, muddy grey - did they not hint at a future in which the forms of
the present day would be destroyed and replaced by others? Already people were
beginning to argue for the legitimacy of the great masters of the Renaissance, even
though they still occupied a position that was far more powerful than that of the
newcomers (see, for example, Georges Mourey in Le Journal on the Salon
d'Automne of 1911). Minds that confuse what is at the present time with what is
permanent, cannot bring themselves to admit that change is of the very stuff of
existence.
The painters were the first to be surprised by the storms they had let loose without
intending to, merely because they had hung on the wooden bars that run along the