by other elements. This was emphasized even more by my smooth,
impersonal handling
of pigment, renouncing all texture variations.*
This involved ascetic restraint, voluntary sacrifice
of advantages which had
become
the privilege of every painter after
impressionism, and, even more, after cubism.
Rich
variety of texture gave those
pictures a quality of peinture which was highly
valued
by the
connoisseur. Textures had a double function. They began the
revolution which
brought about the change from traditional illusionistic rendering to
“painting.” The
new painting did not imitate nature, but translated its manifold
appearances into
direct visual experience. The primary intention
was to produce the visual fundamentals
of picture making.
Visual, not literary, relationships were created within the picture.
They were
a testimonial to the imagination of the painter. After a period of wavering
(since I loved the qualities of texture), I came to feel that textures personify individual
values, and sometimes a hypertrophic ego; that the original need of translating nature
into “texture-formed" paintings did not exist after the abstract painters found more
a
direct and elementary way of picture-making. I gave up the of textures.
use
This is the place where
I may state paradoxically that, in contemporary art, often
the most valuable
part is not that which presents something new, but that which is
missing.
In other words, the spectator's delight may be derived partly from the artist's
effort to eliminate the obsolete solutions of his predecessors. My desire was to go
beyond vanity into the realm of objective validity, serving the public
as an anonymous
agent. An airbrush and spray gun,
for example, can produce a smooth and impersonal
surface treatment which
is beyond the skill of the hand. I was not afraid to employ
such tools in
order to achieve machine-like perfection. I was not at ail afraid of losing
the “personal touch," so highly valued in previous painting. On the contrary, even
I
9 gave up signing my paintings. I put numbers and letters with the
necessary data on
! the of if
back the canvas, as they were cars, airplanes, or other industrial products.
I
could not find any argument against the wide distribution of works of art, even if
turned out by mass production. The collector's naive desire for the unique can hardly
be justified. It hampers the cultural potential of mass consumption. In the visual arts, we
already have mass-produced engravings, wood-cuts, etc. photographic
My experi-
1941. Chicago Space oil on convas.
7,
ments, especially photograms,
helped to convince me that even the complete mechani-
zation of technics may not constitute a menace to its essential creativeness. Compared
to the process of creation, problems of execution are important only so far as the
— —
technique adopted whether manual or mechanical must be mastered. Camera
work, photography, motion pictures, and other projective techniques clearly
show this.
It may happen that painting will
one day easel have to capitulate to this radically
mechanized visual expression. Manual painting may preserve its historical significance;
sooner or later it will lose its exclusiveness. In an industrial age, the distinction between
art and non-art, between manual craftsmanship and mechanical technology no
is longer
an absolute one. Neither painting nor photography, the
motion pictures nor light-
display can any longer separated
be jealously from each other. In 1922 I ordered by
telephone from a sign factory five paintings in porcelain enamel. I had the factory's
color chart before me and I sketched my paintings on graph paper. At the other end
of the telephone the factory supervisor had the same kind of paper, divided into
squares. He took down the dictated shapes in the correct position.
(It was like playing
One of the pictures
chess by correspondence.) was delivered in three different sizes,
1922. Enamel.
• called this “facture,** or “surface
In the old Bouhous we treatment.**
78 79