so that I could study the subtle differences in the color relations caused by the enlarge-
ment reduction. True, these pictures did not have the virtue of the “individual
and
exactly against this over-emphasis. I often hear
touch/' but my action was directed
individual touch, my pictures are “intellec-
the criticism that, because of this want of the
emotional
tual.” This is meant as a derogatory term, referring to a lack of quality.
But my belief is that mathematically harmonious shapes, executed precisely, are filled
with emotional quality, and that they represent the perfect balance between feeling
and intellect.
Gabo,
Colleagues. In 1922 the Russian artists, El Lissitzky, Ilya Ehrenburg and later
of Malevich, Rodchenko and the movement called
came to Berlin. They brought news
van Doesburg, told about Mondrian and neo-
Suprematism. The Dutch painter, Theo
the editors of “Broom,” and the
plasticism; Matthew Josephson and Harold Loeb,
and Tristan Tzara
painter Lozovick, about the U.S.A. Then Archipenko, the sculptor,
came from
and Hans Arp, both dadaists, visited us. Joseph Peters and Vantongerloo
and van
Belgium, and the architects Knud Lonberg-Holm from Denmark, J. J. Oud C.
Eesteren Holland, Frederick Kiesler from Vienna, and Walter Gropius from
from
the artistic efforts of Europe. Der Sfurm of
Weimar. Berlin was for a while the hub of
of cubism, futurism, and abstract art and
Herwarth Walden exhibited the pioneers
Berlin were George Grosz, Kurt
printed the work of the new poets. Already in
latter with tendencies to
Schwitters and Raoul Hausmann, the German dadaists, the
worked there with
constructivism; also revolutionary film producer. Viking Eggeling,
the
other problems.
We often met to discuss painting and
his collaborator, Hans Richter.
Weimar,
Constructivist Congress of 1922 in
Out of these discussions developed the
shop. Photo Hedrich-Blessing.
1942. Apparel by
review MA, of which I was then the Berlin representa-
manifestoes in the Hungarian
greater assurance in regard to our work
tive, and exhibitions, all of which gave us
and future artistic prospects.
wood, glass, nickel-
(See page 44: Nickel sculpture, 1921.) Sculptures and mobiles. Meanwhile I made sculptures from
machine,
started also to work on a light display
plated metal and other materials. I
structure
for many years. It was a mobile
a space kaleidoscope which occupied me
synthesize simple elements by
driven by an electric motor. In this experiment I tried to
most of the moving
a constant superimposition of their movements. For this reason
wire-mesh, lattice-
shapes were made transparent, through the use of plastics, glass,
motion I
work and perforated metal sheets. By coordination of such elements of
battled
For almost ten years I planned and
obtained results that were visually rich.
that I had familiarized myself with all
for the realization of this mobile, and I thought
be. But when the “light-
its possibilities. “I knew by heart" what all the effects would
I felt like
prop” was set in motion for the first time in a small mechanics shop in 1930,
motions and
the sorcerer’s apprentice. The mobile was so startling in its coordinated
magic.
that I almost believed in
space articulations of light and shadow sequences
photography, and motion pic-
I learned much from this mobile for my later painting,
was designed mainly
well for architecture and industrial design. The mobile
tures, as as
thrown
in action, but I was surprised to discover that shadows
to see transparencies
inter-
screens produced new visual effects, a kind of
on transparent and perforated
were the mirrorings of the moving plastic
penetration in fluid change. Also unexpected
These surfaces,
shapes on the highly polished nickel and chromium-plated surfaces.
moving. In addition,
although opaque in reality, looked like transparent sheets when
—
1944. Exhibition stand (in collaboration with Ralph Rapson see next page). Photo by Hedrich-Blessing
differently shaped
transparent wire-mesh flags, having been placed between
1922-30. “Light-prop.*' some
81
80