Eady T echniques of Th ? 'ead Interlacing: 53 
perimentally, not aiming for any immediate application. The manner of such 
fastening leads, of course, lO very different results. Here we are right in the 
midst of techniques, and it may be worth while taking them up one by one. 
Some of the earliest m ummy wrappings, reported to be five thousand 
years old, were excavated recently by Frederic Engel in Paracas, Peru . (See 
journal de La Societe rles Americainistes, Vol. 49, J!)6o, pp. 7-36.) They arc of 
rushes tied together in the manner of twining- that i~. stiff materials were 
connected by means of a softer one to form a mat pliable in one direction, stiff 
in another. T hey arc closer perhaps to basketry than to fabrics as we usually 
understand them. In fan. baskets made in a similar method were found in 
the same burial. Twining we wil l encounter aga in ;1~ a technique evolving 
into weaving, so it appears. llerc, then , we have one of the origins of textile 
techniques, though we arc not yet deal ing with fabrics per sc. 
Basketry is thought by some to be a direct ancestor ol' weaving. Our 
conject.ures can lead us, however, in another direction also, perhaps closer to 
the main line of textile development. 
We may ao;sume that only o;hon ends of so fL. pliahle longitudinal ma­
terials were available, and that thus a process which auached "hort bits of it 
to each other to form a flat cxpamc surely must have t·ome early in the history 
of fabric construction. The result will of necessity he an open, netlike fab ric 
with characteristics f:tr r<•rnovccl from those of hides. for inst;mce, which arc 
in contrast compact. m lid, heavy, a 11cl opaque. With t.ht' usefulness of such a 
lightweight and pliable fabric established for fishing, carrying, and covering 
the hair (early examples of hai rnets have been found in Peru), a desire for 
lengthening the elements of construction must have arisen, which evenwally 
led lO the spinning of fibers. W ith long, flexible ends to work with, further 
methods of construction evolved. T here was l<~oping in its various forms, net­
ting, twining, all accomplio;hing, with variations, the same end: a flat, quasi­
two-dimensional, pliable expanse of materiaL So basic was this newly fab ri­
cated structure that " material" ~till today is the name for it, as is "fabric." 
Already early in our history it added to nature's objects something we may 
think of as a new species in the realm of things. 
Plates 21, JO, 41, ·13 
Knotting, netting, and looping, all interrelated techniques, requ ire 
hardly any tools except, perhaps, a stick as a bobbin tO carry the now prac­
tically endless spun clement of constmction, the yarn, and perhaps another 
stick as a gauge to a~sure uniformity in working. Each of these techniques 
produces open fabri cs. (For more details see Raoul d' Harcourt, T extiles of 