54: On W eaving 
Ancient Pem and Their Techniques. Seattle, Un iversity of Washington 
Pre.ss, 1962.) Looping and also, later, crocheting and knitting add elasticity 
lOa fabric :tnd arc single-clement techniques using only the one continuous 
length of yarn for c<>mtruction. Crocheting and knitting are believed to have 
been invented by the Arabs. The oldest specimens were found in Egyptian 
graves of the Arab period and are not earlier than the seventh or eighth cen­
tury A.n. (Sec Kristin l3iih ler: "Classification of Basic Techniques." Cilm Re­
view, No. 6g, 1948.) 
These fabrics are highly pliable and light in weight because compara­
tively little material goes in to their making. They Gin be given any sha pe, 
and their size is not held to any limits except those of reasonable usefufness. 
When experimenting with such basic methods of construction today, we 
come to rcali1.e the essential qualities of textiles and begin w see present-day 
time-saving devices, in one long perspec­
procedures, with their emphasis on 
tive. Also, we may find ourselves ex<tmining loose ends of developments and 
occasionally adjusting them to today's purposes, sometimes by nothing more 
Plate 1) 
than a change of proportiom, using perhaps cord instead of thread. 
Compared to hides - always limited in size and always of unpractical 
shape - these textile inventions opened vast new horizons. They now made 
possible long lengths of regularly shaped material. Density of construction 
must soon have arisen as a new aim, combining the newly won traits with the 
desirable ones given by nature. 
A drastic departure from single-element techniques came with the in­
ction of rwo separate thread systems, one stationary, the other mobile. 
trodu
Plates 2.J, 28, 12 An early form of working with these was twining. The vertical threads were 
brought into tension - actmllly, this is the main function of any loom - by 
an upper bar and attaching weights to them at the 
suspending them (rom 
bottom, or by stretching them over a second, lower bar. A doubled weft 
thread then crossed at right angles these threads - we now can call them 
warps - from side to side, locking between twists of its two strands one or 
more warp threads. Fabrics or this kind, excavated by J unius Bird on the 
northern coast of Peru and dating hack as far as 2500 n.c., show knots at the 
each crossing due, I believe, to the still short length of yarn 
selvages after 
then available. These knots ocmr also iu pieces from the same site that are 
already actually woven. (See J un ius Bird and Joy Mahler: ''Americil's Old­
est Fabrics," American Fabrics, No. 20, Winter 195 1- 1952; see also Junius 
Andean Culwre H istory, New York, American Museum of Natural 
Bird: 