28 On Weaving 
which the warps pass are of reed or, today, of wire. They are fastened to a 
light frame, thus fom1ing what is still (:ailed the reed. This reed, in LUrn, is 
inserted into another frame which has been given extra weight and sturdi· 
ness, so that it holds the reed firmly and can pound the wert effectively into 
place when swung against it. 
Combining spacing o( the warp and heating of the weft in one motion 
marked a decided advance in cloth making. No lon~er was it n ecessary to in­
~en the baucn in to the opened shed after every new weft thrc<Jd thil t had been 
entered; for now it was a lways in place and h<~d on ly to be pulled lightly to 
fall by its own weight against the weft, pounding it uniformly across the 
whole width of the fabric and simultaneously keeping the wnrp evenly spaced. 
G reater evenness of the cloth resulted, and wider weavings could he a t· 
tempted without added effort. And, again, time was ~aved. 
Si nce we h;we already become aware that a Jo~s of range seems to accom· 
mechanical progress in weaving, let us consider the reverse side of this 
pa ny 
1 1dvance. The hedd le rod, as we have seen, restrined th e weaver in his han· 
dling of the warp. The reed , as part of the b<~tten , added to this its own, 
thou~h minor, limitations. Worki n){ withou t a reecl. the weaver was free to 
manipulate the warp within the scope set by the shedding arrangement he was 
using. This meant that he could cross warp threads, for instance. and thereby 
Plates 25, ·JO, <1·1• 6, , , 
produce a gauze weave, that is, lace effects. \'\lith a reed, however, only those 
1 17
-!8. 58. 90, 99 
warp threads can be crossed that are entered into the same ~pace between 
den ts. Only neighboring threads, usually not more than two, ran be used in 
this manner. Commonly, in weaving, only one warp tluead is drawn in be­
tween dents, thus eliminating entirely the use of deflected warp threads. The 
imaginative gauze weaves of early Peru arc the produn of " hcddle-less" and 
"reed-less" looms! 
Another consequence of the use of a reed- which cannot be listed on 
the positive side though it is not an impediment - is the llJechanical nature 
of the spacing of the warp threads. Before the usc ol' the reed, warp and weft 
adjusted themselves to each other natura lly; they slipped together according 
w their size, their resi lience, and their twist. Wii11 the wnrp held apart artifi­
cial ly, a knowledge of such relationships and also advance planning arc 
necessary to arrive at a balanced interconnection. Where this i~ lac.:king in a 
f<tbric, threads will easil y draw apart or pile up, spoi ling appearance as much 
a~ usefulness. l n an economy-minded age, the possibility of an off-balance 