Designing as Vi,mal Organization 79 
our range of choice. Among other components to be considered, contributing 
to such lim iw tion, is that of price. T his. above others, is often felt as a restric­
tion on the freedom of the designer. I have shown , I think, that I do not be­
lieve in the sovercigmy of the designer, and I cannot concur with the view 
that ~u<..h a limitation must mean fr ustration . Rather, to my mind, limita­
tion may an a~ directive~ ;-end may he ;-es suggestive as were both the material 
i r~elf and ant icipated performance. Great freedom can be a hindrance be­
ca u.'le of the bewi ldering choices it leaves to us, wh ile limitations, when ap­
proached o pcn-minded ly, can spur the im;-~gination to make the best use o[ 
them a nd pos~ibly even ro overcome them. 
1\s much a I im it i ng factor as price, (or insr.ancc, is the matter of produc­
tion . Whether product ion is by craft or by industrial inethod, this many-sided 
problem ca n be as stimu latin g· as the others d iscussed earli.er . Any one o f 
them can ~crve as starting point in the process of crystall ization that we have 
fol lowed. It is interesting to note her e that m echanized production, however 
uHTd, alw:~ys means a reduction in the range of' possibilities, though usu­
adv;
all y it a l~o means an increase in exactiwde, speed, and quantity of output, 
w hen compared to an ything done with the ancient instrumen t that is our hand. 
A\ to our im med iate concern , the materia l for the wall : it constitu tes no prob­
lcnl for machine or hand. T he consu·uction is of the simplest kill(l, dem;-~nd­
ing nothing hut the simplest type of loom, and the choice between industrial 
or manual production is dependent solely on the quanti ty of material in­
volved. 
T <xlay ~uch matters as, for insta nce, that the finished object be photogenic 
can influence designing. In a time that depends greatly for success upon 
photographic reproduction , a consid el";ltion of th is sort - in it self surely be­
side the point- can becom e a factor tlltlt may have to be taken into account. 
So, too, 111ay the powerful figure o( the cl ient and, in textiles, the buyer, who 
o lten bri ng to t he project preconce ived viewpoints that may be right but, 
a las, can he wrong. 
As you wil l have noticed, I have made n o distinction between the crafts­
man d esigner, the indmtrial designer, and r.he artist - be(;ausc the !'unda­
mcma l, if n ot th e specific, considerations are the same, 1 believe, for those 
who work with 1 he conscience and apperception of r.he artist. With surprise 
and reassurance I recently came across a statement by the painter Lionel 
l'ein inger, who speaks of on e of his pictures as hav ing '"painted itself.'' 
At the beginning we spoke here of the comprehensib le orderl iness which 