64 On Weaving 
considerations of color and inner structure. We will try to approach material 
with just this in mind: to discover its inherent surface quality or the one 
which we might be able to give to it directly by working it or indirectly by 
influencing it. for instance, through contrast with neighboring materials. 
We wi ll look around us and pick up this bit o( moss, this piece of bark or pa­
Plate1 ;~-35 
per, these sterns of flowers, or these shavings of wood or metal. W e will group 
them, cut them. curl them, mix them, finally perhaps paste them, to fix a 
certain order. We will make a smooth piece of paper appear fibrous by 
scratching its surface, perforating it, tearing it, twisting it: or we will try to 
achieve the appearance of fluffy wool by using feathery seeds. Wha t we are 
doing can he as absorbing as painting, for instance, and the result ca n be, 
like a painting, an active play of areas of different complexion . We arc here 
rivitalizing our tactile sense and are not dealing with real wcilving. 
Now, since our interest is textile fornt and not the freer form of the 
painter, we will have to be aware of those cond itions that will make of our 
surfaces textile surfaces. If we try to have a rhythm in them of horizontals, of 
verticals, of horiwntals and vcrtic;tls, or of sr.,ggered d iagonals, we will ar­
rive at resu lts that resemble actual textiles, for the dominant texti le elements 
are present: the straight lines of the d irections and the surface activity. Color 
enters in at this point only as a by-product - since of course nothing is color­
less- not as a focal point. Any color effect is, for the moment, incidental, not 
intcmional. 
We will learn to use gra in "nd gloss. smoothness, roughness, the relief­
quality of combined heavy and fine material - those element~ of form that 
belong tO the aesthetic side of tactile experience- and will find them equal ly 
as imponant a~ areal divi~imh ;tnd tolor. 
Om concentr;ltion in this direction will serve two purposes: first, the 
important activating of om latent perceptivity of nwlicn·; ~econd, the gaining 
of a medium ~uited to demonstrate, in advance of any actual exenllion, how a 
propo~ed de~ign wil l look. in its tactile properties, wh ich :tre difficult to show 
hydtawingor painting: a t;lCtile blueprint. We will have learned to think o[ 
mrf;1ce charancrist ics as means fu ll y as expressive as line and color. 'We will 
also have hecorne comciou\ of this medium as a distinctive textile trail. If a 
sculpwr deals maiuly with volun H:, an architect wid1 space, a painter with 
color, then a weaver deals primarily with wctile cfl'ccts. But, as was said a hove, 
qua lities of the inner structure arc as much pan of a textile as are effects o[ 
outer tactile surface. The structure of a weaving, as well as the fibers chosen 