68 On W eaving 
information. T oday, words generally c:trry by far the grea test load of our 
expressive manifestations. 
Along with cave paintings, threads were among the earliest transmitters 
of meaning. In Peru, where no written language in the generally understood 
sense had developed even by the time of the Conquest in the sixteenth cen­
tury, we find- to my mind not in spite of this but because of it - one of the 
highest textile cultures we have come tO know. Other periods in other pans of 
the world have achieved highly developed textiles, perh<lps even technically 
more intri<.:atc ones, hut none has preserved the expressive directness thro ugh­
out its own history by this specific meam . In this light we may revaluate 
what we have been made to think of as the high poims of the art of weaving: 
the famous great t<tpestries of the Gothic, the Rennissnnce, the llaroque; the 
pre<.:ious brocades and damasks from the Far East; the Renaissance fabrics. 
Tremendous achievements in textile an that they are, they play first of all the 
role of monumental il lustrations or have decorative supporting parts to play. 
They are responsible, I think, for textiles being relegated to the place of a 
minor art. But regardless of scale, small fragment or wall-size piece, a fabric 
can he great an if it reul ins direnne~s of communication in its specific me­
dium. 
Th is directness of communic<t tion presupposes the closest interaction 
Plate 65 
of medium and design. A painted face obeys other laws of formation than a 
1'/ates i ), i 4, 75 
woven face, and t11e more clearly the process relates to the form, the stronger 
the resultant impact will be. Much of the potency of textile art has been lost 
during centuries of efforts to pmduce woven versions of paintings, often 
on cartoons of the grea t painters of the past - on Raphael's, for in­
based 
\tanc.:e. Uut trespassing into another art form, however great that form may 
be, does not necessarily bring forth great art works. On the contrary, the 
original concept as well as the transposition suffers by the very fact of indirect­
ness. This does not mean th tt t 110 great tapestrie~ have het:n c.:rea ted in the 
Gothic or later periods. The Unicorn Tapestrie~ surely are greilt works of 
art, and they are truly weaverly in their components. But many of the large 
w;tl l-sizc hangings in our museums arc not as ~,·cat as their sii'.e or their 
placement may encourage us to beli eve. i\nd a numher of present-day efforts 
on the part of those trying to revive a declining traciil ion are misdirected be­
ca me, again, they turn to those outside the field to excite new vitality where 
wor·k has grown dull. Examples arc the work of the famOilS French tapc~try 
workshops which today are producing technical ly expert pieces that arc often, 