Draft Notation : 45 
fir!)t unit clearly from the repeats, it has to be marked as such. Ordinarily this 
unit is placed in the lowe1· left-hand corner of the draft and is distinguished 
either by a differem color - red for the unit, blue for the repeat- or, in a 
black. and white representation. by a different graphic means. Sometimes tlle 
limits of the unit arc just marked at the lower left-hand corner on the outside 
of the draft. The unit should thus be recognizable at first glance and convey 
mmediately the number of warp and filling threads needed for the construc­
i
tion of the weave. 
With few exceptions, gauze or leno weaves, for example, any wenve can 
be dnfted in this manner. Lengthy descriptions of the execution of a weave, 
giving the threading, the tie-up of the loom, and finally the sequence of weav­
ing operations, can be easily reduced to this simple notation, which gives ail 
the necessary informa tion . T he construction of a weave can be understood by 
ing the draft, instead of having to go through the lengthy process o l' ac­
read
tual execution. Compared to a laborious realistic ponraiwre of a weave, 
showing mainly its appearance, this notation, besides being easier and faster 
to perform, has the add i tiona 1 advantage of showing- clear I y those stru <:lllral 
elements that do not appear on the surface ;md can thus be shown naturalis­
ticalJy only by distortion. In histOrical research work, also, the general adop­
tion of this system of notation. so common iu commercial textile work, would 
tnean in many cases a gTeat simpli fication of recording. It is amazing to see 
what complicated reporting is often resorted to, instead of u·anscribing the 
thread construction imo the code of draft writing. 
If the shorthand of draft notation as discussed above proves to be a use­
ful tool in the construction of weaves, it is cqunlly helpful in the analysis of 
~veaves- that is, in the tracing- of a construction already executed. I n analyz­
mg a given piece of material, every filling thread or every warp thread is fol­
lowed through its course of rectangular intersections with the opposite thread 
and every raised warp thread that crosses over a filling thread is 
system; 
marked according tO the system of notation. 
Wherever the piece of cloth that is the subject of analysis can be cut, 
1 
his process of tracing the course of each thread - usually with the help of a 
long needle- is greatly simplified. For, by cutting along a filling thread, for 
ance, the path of the thread can be seen in cross section when looked at 
inst
from above, and the fol lowing filling threads ca n be lifted out one by one, giv­
ing a chance for easier observation of the thread's intersections than when 
seen on the face o[ the fabric only. The same holds true when warp threads 