The ordinary
person is bewildered by contemporary art. The teaching of a dis-
torted history of art, rooted in dogmatic definitions of what
ought to constitute art,
often
prevents him from approaching new modes
of expression. Anything which he finds
difficult to understand makes him impatient
and angry, sometimes even hostile. But there
are ways of meeting the situation.
The observer s emotional and intellectual interest can
be stimulated so that
he approaches the subject with a more positive
attitude. He can be
shown —
that without special preparation only minority
a can follow new trends
mainly because the professional artist,
through daily work with his material, acquires
a superior understanding of his
means, and is led to newer and newer formulations that
supersede old standards.
These findings are the result of an organic process, a growth
in knowledge,
experience, and intuition. This can hardly be matched by the layman.
But
the new formal
solutions can act as catalysts for the few who,
because of an inclination
similar
to that of the artist, react positively. Then, slowly
and almost unnoticed, as if
by a process of osmosis, the work of
the new artist diffuses and penetrates through
every phase of life. In from thirty
to fifty years the process reaches a saturation point.
The new form expression
of has become part of civilization and the cycle
will be
renewed.
The process of diffusion may be accelerated. Intellectual
preparation and criticism
may undo dogmas. Though it is doubtful whether
art can ever be fully “explained/*
it may be helpful to the reader to
retrace my own development, and to show how my
work in abstract art grew
out of a gradual grasp of means and interrelations.
Seeming chaos.
I did not begin as an abstract painter. Intimidated by the
apparent
chaos of
contemporary painting, then represented by the fauves,
cubists, expression-
ists, and futurists, I turned to “solid” values, the
to renaissance painters. I had no
difficulty in “understanding” them. not
Was I prepared by novelists and biographers
to appreciate their monumentality?
Raphael s worldly madonnas, the heavenly smile
of the Gioconda
and her fine hands, the weighty dignity of Michelangelo—
these
were
already interpreted by writers. We ordinarily like things
which we understand,
and we usually look for those things which we know
by heart. They afford an agree-
L.
Moholy-Nagy. Space modulator
able reassurance, and confirm our education. It
did not occur to me that beyond the
with
highlights (Plastic shaped by hand,
illustration of a mythological and religious
story, pictures must have other
1942 qualities^My
).
eyes were not trained
yet to see. My approach was more that of “hearing”
the pic-
ture’s literary significance than of seeing form and visual
elements. I was conscious
neither of these fundamentals nor of the technique
of execution. I would not have
67