of its suitability for use, its material,
build, not only upon practical considerations tions, spatial patterns or spatial
relations originate. This fact is the
best guide to
to the list too, as
construction, and economy; the experience of space belongs a judgment of modern
and pseudo-modern architecture. The latter
shows only volume
psychological need.* articulation, in
comparison with the rich space articulation—
i.e., relations of planes
vaguely, or as a mystical approach to the subject. It and slabs— of
This idea is not to be taken modern architecture (Fig.
36).
recognized as a necessary element in the archi-
will not be long before it is generally
That is, architecture will be
tectonic conception, which will be exactly circumscribed.
shelter from the cold
understood, not as a complex of inner spaces, not merely as a
arrangement of rooms,
from danger, nor as a fixed enclosure, as an unalterable
and
38. The Eiffel Tower.
of
component in living, as a creation in the mastery space
but as an organic
The Eiffel Tower is on the border line between
architecture and sculpture. Accord-
part of a rational biological whole should find in
experience. Individuals who are a
ing to the definition laid down in this
book, it is a piece of sculpture: a volume
recuperation, but also a heightening and harmo-
their home not only relaxation and
creation. It is a broken-through, completely
perforated "block."
nious development of their powers.
remove the con-
on its highest plane, will be called upon to
The new architecture,
An
between the analogy. The fact that kinetic sculpture
artificial, between the open and closed, exists leads to the recognition of a space
flict between the organic and
condition which is not the result of
neglect these questions because the emphasis the position of static volumes, but consists of visible
country and city. We are accustomed to
and invisible forces, e.g., of
conception of architecture will the phenomena of motion, and the forms
is still upon the house as a single unit. The future that such motion
creates (Figs. 17,
the town, the region, and the 29, 30-32, 39 and page 74).
consider and realize, beyond the single unit, the group,
The phrase
kinds; some day "material is energy" will have significance
short, whole. The means to this end may be of many for architecture by empha-
country; in the
sizing relation,
instead of mass.
elementary insistence on created space. The standard for
we will surely arrive at this
the specific needs of the dwelling of the individual,
architects will then no longer be
influence, but will revolve around a general
or of a profession with a certain economic
must have. After this general
plan, that of the mode of biological living which men
individual needs.
foundation is established, variations may be introduced, justified by
different
investigations of biological requirements in
People are today conducting
seems to produce results which are related.
fields of experience. Their research
—
—
creation important as they are
Efforts to realize a new spatial conception and
new orientation.
should therefore be understood only as a component of this
knowledge
brought to its fullest realization when the deepest
Architecture will be
impor-
the biological whole is available. One of its 39. L. Moholy-Nagy. The construction
of human life as a total event in
scheme of the kinetic constructive
man in space, making space comprehensible by
tant components is the ordering of
system, 1922.
articulation.
its
The structure contains on
outer path mounting spirally, intended for general
space; its practical
of architecture lies in the mastery of the problem of
The root
recreation and therefore
equipped with a guard-rail. Instead of steps, it is
in the
in technological advance.
development lies
form of a ramp. The path
ends at the top in a semi-circular platform which
has
access to an elevator
shaft. The upper end of the platform is jointed, while
the
lower end emerges
on o horizontal which takes the public out by a downward
esca-
and sculpture. Although architecture and
The boundary between architecture
lator. The
horizontal ring-shaped platform glides downward in respect
to the ele-
at times easily may be con-
sculpture are separate domains, the treatment of space
votor and
by means of the turning of the whole structure. The path
of motion for it
sculpture may is the inner
with treatment of volume. In other words: to the untrained eye, spiral. Parallel to the outer path there is a further spiral,
fused with the steepest
practicable incline, for the use of more athletic visitors.
This, unlike the outer path,
architecture, and a work of architecture as enlarged sculpture (Fig. 38).
appear as
hos
no rail.
the case with classical architecture, where the modulation
The latter was almost always
Above the upper platform for the public there is
a horizontal plane forming three
predominant. But space creation in our time has quarters of a ring, which is the terminus
of masses and bodies (volumes) was of the "athletes’ track," and is connected
with
a slide pole parallel to the elevator shaft.
The slide pole, by means of a flexible
explanation may clarify this. If the side
changed the meaning of architecture. A brief
attachment, can be moved to any point
on the upper ring-shoped surface, and can
different direc-
of volume (i.e., a clearly circumscribed body) are scattered in
walls a
also be swung to any point of the
ground level of the whole structure.
The figures indicate the scale and
the arrows the direction of motion.
• perhaps the most valuable of recent years, on the question of architecture,
A valuable theoretical study,
"Bauen in Frankreich, Bauen in Eisenbeton, Bauen in Eisen" (Verlog Klinkhordt
is the book by S. Giedion:
attempts to show that in modern construction the correct application of
& Biermann, Leipzig). Giedion
Instead of static: kinetic.
What we grasp of kinetics today
which the actual architectural creation. But he also is slight. The building
materials and principles of economy is that produces
only means to realization of architecturally envisioned ends.
says that material and construction are the
materials at our disposal
permit extraordinary
performances, but they scarcely come
(Harvard University Press, is once more an
His latest book "Space, Time and Architecture" 1941)
near
the "fantastic" idea of a kinetic space
creation.
important and excellent contribution.
61
60