1
way solve the problem of painting
more clearly than I can tell that I was on the to
often believe that
with my own means. But what is a problem? Young students the
simple feeling
problem something scholarly and enigmatic, beyond and
artist’s is
problem, seen from the point of view of the worker, can
thinking. In reality, a be
an event, or of its smallest detail, to the deepest
anything, from careful observation of
translate the "problem” into
intellectual penetration of any subject. The task is to a
the spectator. In those
“form" which can be comprehended and absorbed by days
mainly for
color became my "problem." Color, which I had so far considered its
*
illustrative possibilities, was transformed into a force loaded with potential space
articulation full of emotional qualities. I started out to clarify how different
and
in with each other. I made dozens of collages
colors behave when organized relation
country, where from the hilltops
with colored paper strips. Spending a holiday in the
with colored stripes
I could see hundreds of small strips of land, I painted pictures in
juxtaposition and called them "acres." I could have called them color compositioi
1920.
from the dogma that a painter is a painter only when
but it was difficult to cut loose
otherwise his paintings may be contemptuously
he renders or interprets nature and that
Not recorded in books, they
labeled "decoration." Such conventions were all pervasive.
It was forbidden,
existed as an unwritten law by common agreement of professionals.
exist in nature. It
for example, to black. "Clear black," it was said, "does not
use
green and blue." (Of course, this did not produce black
has to be produced from red,
"One should never use a compass or a ruler. If
at all, but only a kind of dirty mess.)
free-hand, but it must look as though it had
one makes a circle, it should be made
these arguments. One risked
been made by a compass." I struggled hard against
excommunication.
I in Vienna, lost among the
Influence of machine technology. In 1919, lived
in the agricultural
depressed conformists of the postwar period. Coming from a farm
1920.
Collage.
Austrian
center of Hungary, I was less intrigued with the baroque pompousness of the
developed technology of industrial Germany. I went to
capital than with the highly
period show the influence of the industrial "land-
Berlin. Many of my paintings of that
reality rendered with photographic eyes,
scape" of Berlin. They were not projections of
technology, reassem-
but rather new structures, built up as my own version of machine
bled from the dismantled parts. Soon these dismantled parts appeared in my montage
my walks I found scrap machine parts, screws, bolls, mechanical devices.
pictures. On
them on wooden boards, combined with drawings and
I fastened, glued and nailed
way produce real spatial articulation,
painting.* It seemed to me that in this I could
falling on the actual
frontally and in profile, as well as more intense color effects. Light
objects in the constructions made the colors appear more alive than any painted com-
bination. I planned three-dimensional assemblages, constructions, executed in glass
1936. Book jacket.
metal. Flooded with light, I thought they would bring to the fore the most powerful
and
to sketch this type of “glass architecture," I hit upon the idea
color harmonies. In trying
of transparency. This problem has occupied me for a long time.
’ painting brazen courage. I
Under the influence of cubist collages, Schwitter s "Merz” and dadoism's
rediscovery the tech-
started out with my photomontages, too. This led me in the same period to the of
—
1922. Photogrom montage. nique of the photogram (cameraless photography).
72 73