lnlen·e/alion of Fiber and Construction 61 
large the series o[ these examples to the seemingly endless range of our fab· 
rics. With the development of modern chemistry, a group of completely new 
fiben has been added to th e few that have been in usc f01· hundreds and even 
thousands of years. These new synthetic fibers introduce new combinations 
of properties and thus are drastically changing our materials as we have 
known them. One important aspect of this new development is that, since the 
preliminary stage of producing a raw material having the desired qualities of 
the final product already partially specifies the fabric, the manner of weaving 
this raw material is growing less important. 
Chemistry is affecting our materials in still another important way. 
While the creation of new fibers determines a (abric in large part before it is 
ever woven, the creation of new finishes influences our fabrics equally after 
they are woven. These after-trea tments and coatings bring about changes as 
radical as those brought about by the new fibers, and they, too, reduce the 
weig-ht of the influence of the thread construction. Up to now, the unique 
characteristics of a fabric have been dctennined by the interaction of fiber 
and weave, each of more or less equal importance; but today we see an in­
crea~ing shift toward having the ultimate characteristics determined by the 
nature of the fibers themselves or by modificatiom hrought about through 
the finishing process, either before or after the fabric is woven. 
The tendency to pay less and Jess attention to thread constructions did 
not set in, however, with the influence of chemistry on the development of 
textiles. With the coming o( mass production, which is synonymous with 
quick production, simple constructions naturally wok over the field; since 
they are best suited to a manufacture that aims mainly at quantity, speed, 
and reduction of cost. The reason that surface effects in textiles today are pro­
duced so preponderantly by the effect o[ the yarns themselves rather than by 
structural means, in machine-woven as well as in hand-woven textiles, most 
likely has a source in this development. 
The general decline in the inventive use of clements of construction so 
commonly found today as compared to other periods is thus explained easily 
enough. There is no reason, however, why new contributions to textile 
development should not come from this side too. Developments seem to come 
about inharmoniously; we grow a bit here, and then n bit there- so why be 
impatient? 