42 On W eaving 
w;•rp and weft is sought, the fanhc~t intersection within a given uni t is chosen 
for a satin weave. The long, floating threads cover the points o( intersection of 
warp and weft and perm it the threads to be beaten together closely, so that a 
uniform, smooth stn·face is achieved, lacking any obviously visible structural 
efren~. 
We have found that the plain weave requires two warp and two filling 
threads for its con~tntction , and the twill weave at least three. The satin 
weave call~ for a minimum of fi ve warp and weft threads. 
To d iscover the best position for the points of intersection of warp and 
filling, technically termed "stitchers," the unit of threads that is to form the 
satin is divided into two groups of different si?.c that arc larger than on e 
thre;td, that are not divisible one into the othet·, and that are not divisible by 
a common third. A unit of five thn.:ads, for example, is divided into one group 
of two and one of three. After interlacing the first warp thread with the first 
filling thread, the p laces for further intersection will be, for every following 
weft thread, either nlways two or always three warp threads removed from the 
prereding intersection. Thus the stitchers for a !)·leaf satin will be in the or­
der 1, g, !), 2, 4: that is, the first wnrp thread intersects with the first weft 
thread. the third warp thread with the second, and so on. Progressing in the 
other possible order, the stitchers will be placed in the following arrange­
ment: •. tj, 2, 5· 3· Every warp thread has to he attached once within the unit 
to every weft thread, in a position that allows for the widest possible separa­
tion of the stitchers. Many satins ca n he formed hy this method. The unit of 
six threads forms an exception, ~ince it cannot be d ivided into any groups 
that comply with the requirement~. Advancing in the order 1, g, 5, 2 , 4. 6 
~ce rm JXlSsible at fir~ t glance, when only the first unit is considered. But the 
repeat will reveal the defect thilt the first and the sixth stitchers come to u e 
side by side. By exchanging the last two stitchers, a workable order can b e 
given. Thus, instead of 1, 3. 5. 2,1J, (i, the progression will now read 1, 3· 5, 2, 
fi. 1(. In larger un it~. more than two numbers of progression can be found. 
For irmance, the unit of sixteen threads can be divided into groups of three 
nnd thineen, five and eleven, seven and nine. nil equally suited to our pur­
po\c here. 
This wide separation between the points of interlacing in the satin weave 
makes for a very pliable, soft fabric which, in addition, can be highly glossy 
when executed in a lustrous material because of the homogeneous surface of 
either warp or weft. The contrast t~ the plain weave becomes apparent again 