Tlte Loom : 31 
A prinsitive loom, used in India among other places, gives us insight into 
early ways of ~u~pcnding the roller. The loom was placed under a tree and 
an overhang-ing branch wa~ used co hold iL To make the weaver independent, 
no doubt. o f ~uth specific locality and the exposure to weather, a framework 
with uprighr pow; w;~s developed to act as support for the roller-shaft con­
trivance. Once the idea of suspen sion had taken hold, it was extended to in· 
dude aho the bauen , which had gone through its own phases of transforma· 
tion. as discussed before. Here. then, was the fully developed shaft loom with 
fn:e-~win~ing l>auen. It was the loom that was to take care of the textile needs 
of 1nany peoples for centuries to come. 
The introduction or the treadles and the pendent bauen. like the earlier 
invention of the hedcllc, caused a rise in cloth production that must greatly 
have broadened the inceptive idea of the uscfltln ess or textiles. For, as need 
presses wward fulfil hnent, so does obtainable fu lfillment exdte n eed - a gen· 
erative cycle, spiralling to dimensions of both need and productivity that 
Ill liSt scent CX<'Cssive to any gener<1tion earlier than the one participating in it. 
Thoug h it is bel ievccl w have been devised by the Chinese speci rically for 
the weavi ng nf silk, the shah or treadle loom later carne universally into all· 
round usc. It i~ likely that until the third century A.D. its usc, together '"ith 
the art of silk weaving, remained confined to China. Gradually, however, it 
was taken over hy other parts of the East and finally reached the West: first 
Spain and Italy; la tct· France, Germany, and England. 
This loom hccame the loom of medieval Europe. In all essentials, it is 
al~o the loom of our t ime, though it lOok funher centuries to transform it into 
the mirantlom instrument o f preci~ion and speed that it is today. There was, 
however, no sun·essive clcvelopmcnt. For hundreds of years it remained in 
the swg-c it had reached. Though variations were invented, they all operated 
with in the con lines of rhc fund<Jmcntal principles on which it was built. 
W e have, in foll owing the development of weaving equipment, tnken the 
viewpoint that saving time was a leading concern. For hundreds o( years, 
however , no inventions were added th<Jt markedly increased the speed of 
weaving. T he inventions were, however, significant in another respect: in 
reconquering some of the lost range that went with the mechanization of op· 
era tions. 
Mention should first be made of a shedding device, introduced by the 
Chinese so it seems, that modified the original countermovement of pairs of 