Th e Loom 23 
the underlying ideas in the mechanism of today's automatically functioning 
loom. 
One of the initial problems calling for a solution in terms o[ equipment Plates r-9 
is that of giving tension to the first-mentioned group of threads, the warp. W e 
wi II not consider, <tt this point, matters of operation, or prepar.ttion for it 
such as warping, for instance, but will concentrate on implements and their 
deve lopment. It is interesting to observe that the answers to some of the tech­
nical points at issue are often of smrtlingsimplicity, as are truly ingenious in­
ventions. For instance, by atmching one end of the warp threads to a bar and 
weights to their other end, the desired tension is ach ieved in a strikingly easy 
manner. This. then, is the warp-weight loom, an upright loom, as is ap­
parent from the usc of weights. It is best known as the Creek. loom. I t was 
also used in England during the early Bronze Age ;mel in the Swiss lake dwell­
ings. It is nlso the loom, with a slight variation. used by the Chi lkat Indians of 
the northwest coast of America. 
Another method of achieving tension is by stretching the warp threads 
between or over two bars, the prototypes of warp and cloth beams known to 
our day. To keep them taut, the bars arc attached to a framework in either 
vertica l or horizontal position. lloth these ways have bec.:n used in various 
parts of the world: the upright version for tightly packed weaves such as tap­
estries and rug'S; the horizontal one for finer and looser materials. Examples 
of the venical type are found ove1· most parts of the earth, from anriem to 
modern times. It was known in Egypt and Peru, in Inclia and Asia Minor. in 
the European countries and Africa, for example. and it is still in usc, among 
othc.:r places in France, for wpestry work, and in the United Swtes by the Nav­
ajo lndiam for their rug weaving. The best known early ex11mple of the 
primitive hori.wntal type is the Eg)'ptian loom, which is set low 10 the ground. 
In the An1kan highlands still fairly recently a simi lar type ha5 been found. 
The invention of the back-srrap loom addecl regulative tension to the 
inventory of early weaving devices. One b;u·, carrying the sprcad-ont, para lid 
warp threads, is att< 1ched to a pole or a tree; the other is fastened to the waist 
of the weaver. who can adjust the tension by leaning forward or backward. 
This m;1kcs minute regulation possible and with it a more de licnte weaving 
operation. This bilck-strap loom occurs mainly in the region of the Pacific 
O<:ean. It was, for instance, in use in J apan and the !Vhllayan islands, and in 
China, Burma, and Tibet. In Peru. Guatemala, and Mexico, it can still be 
seen in usc, and in some remote regions of Asia. 