36 On Weaving 
inches a:> is the case in hand wcavino-. T hough it did not t.1ke cenwries ro 
" . 
\Olve these problems, more than fifty years were needed w develop the neccs-
~ary con trivances. 
Further developments concerned themselves with the matter of conserv­
ing power in the process of passing the weft from side ro side. In the standard 
loom in usc today, it is estimated that at least one-half of t he power needed to 
dri ve the loom goes in to propelli ng a heavy shuttle, carrying yards and yards 
of weft, back and [onh with the required \peed. I n 18J4, il John Smid• pat· 
emed a loom that drew the weft thread with needles through the shed. In 
1
!J4!). a mach ine was built in the Un ited States based on t he same underlying 
principle of using lightweight welt carriers instead of shuttles. The weft 
here is not contin uom but is just long enough to reach across the fabric an d 
lO be turned in at the selvages. The power saved makes it possible to operate 
this loom two or three times f:~ster than wday's standard looms. T his loom 
· be-
has the added advantage of enlinging greatly the rnnge of weft sclecuon 
yond the four to six choices ordinarily possible. So far Lhis loom is no t in gen· 
eral use, probably due in large part tO its high price: and only a few models 
can be seen at institutes for textile research. 
Another invention was a loom that operates a selecti ng system e lec~ro-
. II 1~· · · · selecu no-
magnet•ca y. 'lrst expen ments w1th electromagnetiC current as a o 
device were made by Eugene Vincenti who, in 1856, patented a Jacquard 
selective shedding system governed electromagneticall y. Another lootn , ava il­
able today in a narrow width for sample weaving, appl ies the same princ ip le 
to a shaft loom ; that is, it operates the shaft selection electromagnetical!Y· 
T his loom, too, is at present nut in genera l use, d ue to its high price, dcsp•te 
its gTeat advantage in regard to the easy rh;mge it penni ts from one weave 
formation to another. 
Our machinery has become intricate, ou r manner of working fast. Yet 
age must have felt that way about its achievements, and only looking 
every 
back does everything that went before seem slow. How slow will we appear 
some day? 