Designing as Visual Organization 73 
though I <~m addre~sing myself now only to professionals. l3ut though I know 
that designing tilk.cs pr<~ctir<ll knowledge of the work involved, still I am 
much aware that the dividing· line between the trained and the untrained 
hecorm:s blurred when boil1 arc fa cin?; the new. Fur anyone who is making 
something that previou~ly did not exist in this l'orlll i~, at that point, of neces­
sity an amateur. How ca n he know how this thing is done that never has been 
done before? Evc1 y designer, every artist, every inventor o •· discoverer o[ 
something new is in th;n ~eme an amateur. And to explore the untried. he 
Jllll~l he an adventurer. For he finds himself alone on new ground. H e is left 
to his own devices and Ill liSt have imagination and dating. All decisions here 
are his own, and only he is responsible. l3ut though it is he who is in charge, 
he feels himself to be on ly an intermediary who is trying to hel p the not-yct­
cxistem turn inw real ity. Swnding between the actutr l and that which may 
be. the conscicntiom clc~ig·ner, as l sec it, seeks to forego his own identity in 
orcle•· to be able more i mpa r1 ia lly to in terprct the potclll ial. For the les~ he 
himself, his subjectivity, stands in the way of the object that is to take form, 
the more it will have "ohjcnive" qu01litic~ and thereby will also take on a 
more lasting character than it otherwise could. And just as ronce1 ·n with ma­
terial and method or treatment engages his <.onstious mind and frees the 
formative energies that we recognize when crystall i7.cd as ideas, so also, and 
to the same end, docs the tete-a-tete with the stil l-<lmorphous absorb his self­
a wa rcness. 
Let me ill ustratc my point with 01 specific design project, a textile prob· 
lcm in our case. To be more easily understood, it will be one of modest scope. 
Nevertheless, I hopt: it will be possible to trace the variom steps involved in 
its realization and thereby w have a look at some or the facets of this phe­
nomenon that is designing. 
Let us assume that the task i~ to design a wall-covering material, quite 
specifically one suited for museum walls: that is, a materia l for'' specific prac­
tica l use. As conscientious designers in our passive role, we wil l let the fabric­
specify its own fultlrc characteristics, such as perhaps being dust­
to-be 
repellent, non-fading. woven suniciemly closely to cover up any irregularities 
of the wall, and, for the same purpose, having a certain amoun L o( bulk. 
Furthermore, it should neither stretch nor sag, and it should be possible lO 
clean it by brushing or wipi ng. Also, any small nail holes driven into it should 
close easily after removal of the nail. It should, in all probability, be light in 
color , perhaps even light-reflecting, possibly Hame-rccmling, and certainly 