The Loom 25 
clueing shed and countershed by the simplest means. This is the free rigid 
heddle. It is of a hard material, such as wood, bone, or even metal, and has 
narrow bars, each with a small hole in the middle through which a warp 
thread runs. Another warp thread is passed through the space between the 
bars. As the apparatus is raised 01· lowered, the latter threads slide past those 
threaded through the holes, thereby forming a shed, alternately above or be­
low those threads. This invention combines the device for forming each of the 
two opposite sheds in one contrivance. Its disadvantage lies in the limited 
number of warps that can be used without call ing for so large a size oE heddle 
that it becomes unwiel dy, and also in the friction that may occur when the 
threads slide up and down the slots. Also, it m ust be remembered, only the 
two basic sheds can be formed, thus making only a plain weave construction 
possible. Nevertheless, it has proved successful in the weaving of narrow fab­
rics and was used, for instance, in America, Germany, and Finland. 
Weaving in the preheddle days could have held no greater promise as a 
technique of interlocking threads than did others such as twining, looping, 
and netting. With the simplification that the invention o( the hecldle brought, 
weaving was singled out, for millennia to come, tO attain a rna jor role in civ­
ilization. 
The earliest evidence of the heddle is found in Egypt where it is esti· 
mated to have been in use before 2000 n.c. I t probably was invented inde· 
pendently in many places and at various periods. In Peru it was known as 
early as severa l centuries n.c. for some four thousand years the idea of the 
heddle has remained intact, and it is easily recognized in the form of the 
harness in today's power loom. The shed-rod, in a sense an cmuryo heddle, 
has been given up, to be succeeded by a second, full-fledged heddle. 
The next step, from hedd le opposites to multiple heddles, signifies the 
carrying-through of the initial notion. Series of heddles, with warp threads 
in designated order, raised in accordance with that order, will form structural 
patt:erns. To this day, the shaft loom of our industry operates on this very 
principle. 
The gTeat technical advance of the hcddlc prepared the way that even· 
tually was to lead lO q uantily production of enormous dimensions. But, as 
Luther Hooper wisely reminds us, in his book Hand-Loom. Wea ving, "Each 
step toward the mechanical perfection of the loom, in common with all ma­
chinery, in its degree, lessens the freedom o( the weaver, and his control of 
the de~ign in working." Thus the emergence of the heddle is also actua ll y 11 