Th e Fundamental Constructions: 39 
r . h"b" the 
1 
qua tty to one that transgresses these limits, so also a weavmg that ex us . 
origin of its rectangular thread-interlacing will be better than one wbtch 
conceals its structure and tries, for instance, w resemble a painting. Accept足
ance of limitations, as a framework rather than as a hindrance, is always proof 
of a productive m ind. 
The threads g-rouped vertically or lenJ.,rthwise in the fabric are the warp 
threads; those running horizont;-~ lly or crosswise are the filling threads. By 
collective names they are the warp and the weft or filling or woof or pick. The 
W <trp thre<~ds arc stationary in the process of weaving while the filling threads 
are in motio n, which indicates tha t the weaver for the most part deals with 
the filling threads and which may explain the greater number of terms for 
them. 
Plates ro, r J 
In the plain weave this intersecting of wnrp and weft takes place in the 
simplest possible manner. A we ft thread moves alternately over and under 
each warp thread it mee ts on its horizontal course from one side of the warp 
to the othe r; returning, it reverses the order and crosses over those threads 
IInder which it moved before and under those over which it crossed. This is 
the quintessence of weaving. The result is a very firm structure which. since 
it is colllpara tivcly unelastic, is strong under tension and also easily preserves 
its rectangular shape. It has an even, uniform surface, with warp and weft ap足
pearing in equa l measure and producing the sa me effect on the front and the 
back of the fabric. It has a tend ency w be stilT and, since the threads here can足
no t be pushed tOgether very closely, it appears perforated when held against 
the light. Not more than two warp :md rwo weft threads are necessary for its 
basic construction, and therefore only the simplest type of equipment is re足
qnired. It is also a weave that demands less material for its construction and 
G in be produtcd [aster than ;-~ny oth er. The usefulness of these characteristics 
is evident. There is probably no weave produced in more millions of yards 
he world over, now as in former times, th<~n this plain weave. We recognize 
t
it in Egyptian mummy cloth 11 nd in our sheets, in unbleached muslin, potato 
satks, and sail d oth- in short, wherever strength and a solid surface tfwt does 
not permit threads to be caught accidenta lly are required. 
lt is interesting to note that this most practical of all thread constructions 
is a t the same time also the one most conducive to aesthetic elaborations. T he 
fact tha t warp and weft appear on the surface in equal amounts nod intersect 
visibly leads tO the use of contrasting materia ls and colors for them, thereby 
underlining the original stntcrure of the weave. Emphasizing this structure 