Early T echniques of Th?·erul Interlacing: 55 
History Handbook Series No. 15, 1g6o.) At even such an early stage, acw ally 
a preccramic age, intricate twined structures were developed by transposition 
of selected warp~. thereby attain ing subtle. spatial effects. These fah rics arc 
war p faced, the twined wefts widely spaced, holding the closely set warp 
fim1ly in place. Il is an efficiem technique, tho ugh it was eventua lly over­
taken by that of weaving, which, as later hecame evidenL, proved to be still 
ore effectua l, more open to the time-saving devices that were eventua lly to 
m
lead to its mechanization. Still ear lier than these ancient American f<tbrics, in 
fact the earliest fa brics found to date, are those excavated as recently as 196 1 
by Hans Hclback :tt D na! Huyuk in ancient Anawlia. According to the C-14 
ting method, they date b:1ck as Ear as Gsoo n.c. (See A1·cltaeology, Vol. 16, 
da
No. 1 , Spring 1 g6B, pp. !\~J-45 ·) The photognphs show knotting and also, ac· 
cording to the author, twining, though this is harely discernible. These fab­
rics arc far less developed th;-~n those discussed above. 
Twining, working as we have seen with a double weft thread, produces 
a (abric so mewhat stiff and heavy. It has, however, an additional feature, that 
of spacing the warp evenly between the weft twists. By using heavier or finer 
yarn this spaci ng can be adjusted, due to the resulwnt bul kier or smaller 
twists separa ti ng the warp threads. In fact it is a technique at home on all 
continents, ar.cording tO Dr. 13i.ihler·Oppenheim . (See Ciba Review, October 
1947.) T wining is also the tedmique used in the Chilkat ceremonial blankets Plate 66 
of the uorthern Pacific coast of the North American continent. But here the 
weft covers the warp complelely and carries all the design elements. 
Once work had begun on a vertical thread system intersected rectangu ­
larly by another one, the simplified interlacing of a single weft that picks up 
alterna te warp threads and reverses the selection with every furthc1 · crossing 
was, it seems. a natural next step. It was an important next step, for this, now, 
eaving. The advantage over twining is obvious: only h:·tlf the amount of 
is w
yarn is needed for each passage from side to side, :ntd the result is a lighter 
fabric. Also, the process is far quicker. Saving time and labor, then as surely 
as now, is a proof of intelligence ;md a crucial factor in productivity. (There 
are those who believe that so·called primitive societies had no sense of the 
pressure of time as we experience it today. However, I have only to look into 
my icebox to realize what a present of time it makes me continuously by 
keeping me from struggling for food every day for endless days.) 
At first the interlacing, now established as weaving, seems to have been 
timid, used only after a row or more of twining or between rows of twining. 