-
24 On Weaving 
Next, we can suppose, the hcddle evolved. Up to the time of its inven­
tion, the warp threads to be interlaced had to be lifted up with the lingers, so 
that the crossing, mobile threads, the wefts, could be inserted. After each in· 
terscction, the warps next to be interwoven had to be selected anew - shifting 
from odd· tO even-numbered threads or vice versa - and raised as before. 
Only small groups of warp threads can be lifted up in this manner, just as 
many as a hand can easily hold. This means that, for each passage o( a weft 
thread, as many handfuls of warps had to he picked u p as the width of the 
cloth demanded -a tedious work. By placing a rod into permanent position 
under the threads to be lifted for the passing of the weft, one part of this work 
is greatly simplified, since the thickness of the rod causes a separation of the 
warps to be raised from those to remain lowered. The separation of the 
warps, or the opening·, is called the shed; and the rod, in consequence, the 
shed-rod. Since the fundament< il form of weaving operates on the principle of 
opposites, the problem of the counteropening is left tO be solved. If those 
warps lyiug under the shed-rod arc attached, by means of a string forming 
loose loops around each of them, to a second rod lying on top of the warp, 
the resulting- device, the heddle, produces the rountershed when raised. By 
introducing the weft alternately into the shed formed by the shed-rod and that 
formed by the heddle, the efficiency of the procedure- that is, weaving - is 
increased tremendously. For, ~ince r.he shed-rod remains in positiou through· 
out the weaving of a cloth, one motion- that of lifting the heddle, not count· 
ing that of letting it go- takes care of the previously separate ones of gath· 
ering handfuls of threads over and over again. When the heddle is released, 
the threads raised by it settle back imo their prior position, their "natural" 
position. under the shed-rod. "Natural shed" is an expressive term sometimes 
used for the first shed formation, in contrast to "artificial shed," used for the 
second one, which forces its threads past those maintained in tht:ir position 
over the shed-rod. 
The type of heddle described above is the one that was destined to out· 
live others that evolved in the course of exploring the idea. Deta ils such as 
the various ways of fastening the heddlc loops to the rod, diverging with re­
gion, rare, and period, may be of interest to specialists in the field; but our 
concern here is to trace the main line of mechanical contributions that finall y 
were to result in today's weaving machinery. However, mention should be 
mi!de of a cleverly conceived implement that, though not incorporated in the 
modern inventory of equipment, is interc5ting as another attempt at pro-