T apestry 6g 
however, of mainly decorative va lue. Only in exceptional cases, for instance, 
in the examples illustrated here, where artists worked mainly with Oat areas, 
Pltlfel tJu, Ill, 112 
are they works of an. 
Works of art, to my mind, are the ancien t Peruvian pieces, preserved by an 
l'latcs 79- 90 
arid climate and excavated after hundreds and even thous:tnds of years. There 
are those, large or sma ll, of the Tiahuanaco period, fo r instance- tapestries 
in the pictorial as wel l as the technical seuse- showing the deities of their 
Pantheon; or works from other periods, full of the life of their ·world. There 
are also the highly intelligen t and often intricate inventions of lines or inter­
locking forms. Their personages, ilnimals, plants, stcpforms, zigzags, whatever 
it is they show, arc nil conce ived within the weaver's idiom. Where clear out­
lines are wanted, the threads are maneuvered into position to do chis, some­
times in surprising and ingenious ways varying in invcnLiveness from piece to 
piece. A unique method, for instance, is that of intcrlockiug not only the Plllle 6) 
weft but the warp itself. Where rei ief effects are believed to strengthen the 
presentation, they arc added and worked out imaginatively and skillfully, as 
are other desirable supports. or infinite phantasy within the world of threads, 
conveying strength or playfulness, mystery or the reality of their surround­
ings, endlessly varied in presentation and construction, even though bound to 
a code of basic concepts, these textiles set a standnrd of achievement that is 
unsurpassed. 
Coptic weavings, of' course, also belong among inspired works in tex­
P/ot es 70 77 
tiles, and by some they arc considered to head the I ist. They are developed 
from the basic weaving structures, and thus the figures preserve the essential 
weaving formation. T here is often in them a truly textile juxtaposition of flat 
and fuuy areas. However highly developed they are, thoug-h, their more 
limited scope becomes apparent when they are compared with the more ad­
venturous use of threads in the ancient American pieces. 
A technique tha t has been used in the Near East <~nd Far East is Soumak. 
By wrapping a weft thrcild around one or two warp threads, possibly chang­
ing colors as it crosses from selvage to selvage and reversing the direction of 
wrapping on the return trip, " flat, ribbed, close, heavy fabric can be pro­
duced, suited for pictorial textiles. 
There are, of course, many high points in the art of weaving, in many 
periods and many places, that could be cited as examples of the successful in­
teraction of medium and form. I will be accused of crass one-sidedness in my 
products of Peru , which I advance as the most 
feeling of awe for the textile 