78 On Weaving 
ing raised and lowered threads- shiny and dull, lighter and darker, tan and 
white. This material will be quiet yet alive, responsive to lighting, compliant 
in its relationship to objects more demonstrative than itself in color and 
shape; a backh .,·ound for a flower, a face, a painting, a sculpture. 
From here we can move on lOa wider point of view. We may contend 
that the world around us puts us under great strain and that we need calm 
and quietness wherever we can get them. Today, we should try to counteract 
habit~ that only rarely leave us time to collect ourselves. Every hour on the 
hour we seem to need the latest and, as it turns out, usually the most unset­
tling and gloomy report, often, when seen in retrospect, of non-essentials. 
Ycstelllay's p11pcr is waste paper. Wisdom and insight hardly make headlines. 
Nevcrt.helcss, we arc seldom !'ouncl- on train or phutc, on hus or boat, or i.n 
any given moment of imposed restraim of action- without a bundle of dis­
tractions in our hand in the form of papers or magazines. 
And though it may appear that we are straying from our line of thought, 
it is on the contr;~ry here on the ground of philosophy and momls that atti­
tudes and convictions, the starting points of our actions, are formed. Two 
matte•~ may here be of special concern to the conscientious designer and 
may makt• him ~top and think or, perhaps, think and stap. The first is that 
with his help another object will be added to the many that are already tak­
ing our attention ;~nd our c<Jre, another object to distract us. (Our households 
<:ontain hundreds of objects.) The second is that by trying to give this object 
its best possible shape, by trying to make it as timeless <JS possible- that is, 
not dictated by shon-lived fashion - and by finding for it a Corm as anony­
JHom ••s pos~ihlc- that is, a form unburdened by dominantly individu ;~ l 
traits of the planner- the designer finds himself in direct connict with the 
economic pattern of our time. For the economy of today is built largely upon 
change, and the "successful" designer, a term r have not used before, will 
have w consider the matter of ··calculated obsolescence." W e are urged tO­
day w wa nt more and more thing·s, and we <Jrc su bjecL ed to a vigorous cam­
paign ing for always newer thin~s. things that are not necessarily newer in per­
f'onJJallt C. We arc asked to shift from red to blue or from this bit of' trimming 
to that for the <1ucstionabl c reason or unreason of fashion. I t is evident, J 
think, that the desi~ncr who t.akcs the longer view is by no means identical 
with the '\un.:cssfu r · designer. 
We have w;~tched the coming into being o [ our object and have seen 
how medium and method of work present themselves to us and thereby limit 