30 On W f'aving 
developmctH, except for minor variations. Hut the fabri cs made on this loom 
stand as a testimonial to heights of inventiveness in weaving never reached 
again anywhere at any rime. 
This loom is the loom, mai n ly, ol cotton weavi ng. Jt is believed that an­
other phase in the mechaniza tion of d1e loom wns initiated with the use of a 
new libcr, ~ilk, which the Chinese were expcrimeming with at a time when 
other parts of the world were in the early stages of working with cotton and 
nax. The fineness of the threads made special adaptations of the weaving ap­
pliance~ ncccssilry, and thus it is comide1cd likely that we owe to the Far East 
the improvements that added so importamly LO swift and control led perform­
ance in weaving. 
One of the lirst of these improvements concerned the shedding rneclla­
nism, which had to he made w function smooth ly enoug·h not to da mage the 
r1~tgile thread~. The shed-rod was disranlcd and replaced by a second heddl e. 
The heddle itsel f was changed in some respects. Whereas it previously had 
been dmwn by hand in an upw<trd d irection only an d therefore had consisted 
of only one light rod tO wh ich the upper end of the string loops. carrying one 
warp tlnc:td each, were attached, it now was equipped with a second rod or 
lath to which the lower end of the loops were secured, thus making a down­
ward nmvemem possible. 
\.Vith the lower, second lath, the heddle took on a new name, leaving its 
former one to the loops only, through which the warp thread~ pass. It now 
was ca lled a pair of sha fts or, if upper and lower laths were c:onnected at the ir 
ends by ttpright~. a lnnnc. rn indmtry it isc;~lled a harness. 
A revolutionary change came with the trnmfer from hand to foot opera­
tion of the frames, together with their now two-dit·ectional motion. Si nce, in 
A~ia, n1urh more me is made of the f<'CI in working than in Europe, for in­
sta nce, thi~ ~hift it~elf has been interpreted as another indication of the part 
the East played in subsequent developments. What was done was to suspend 
and also f<Jttple the shafts or fram es, by mea ns of cords running over a r oller 
wh ich was placed above th e loom proper. E<tch lower lath was ti ed to a 
tre:1dle be low the loom. \.Vhcn a tread le was stepped on , one fram e was drawn 
downward, wh ile the other one linked to it automatically rose. Since the 
fnHilC\ rarriccl the hcddles through which the warp threads were drawn , the 
countermovemen t paned them and thereby opened the shed. The hand no 
longer wns needed in th is performance 01nd therefore was free swiftly tO pass 
weft and beat it into place . 
the 
.._ 