50 On Weaving 
mottled surface effect. By adding tying poinL~, or stitchers, wan original basic 
design, a !>at in or perhaps a twill. or by omitting some sti tchers, innumerable 
crepe weaves can he developed. In fact, it is e;1~y to construct hundreds of 
them. It is a u.\dul weave suited mainly for clothing. 
There are innumerable other weave constructions, developed not merely 
of the basic weaves and preserving their original functions, 
as elaborations 
but for further specific functional pmposcs. There are the hack-filling 
Plate 22 
weaves which have as their milin intent a heavier, thicker fabric than could 
be achieved otherwise. As a by-product, such a fabric could have also different 
weave structures in front and back, as well as, of course, different colors. A 
back-filling fabric cou ld have a plain-weave face and a twill bncking or many 
o ther tOlllbinations, as long as a balance between the front and back weave is 
preserved; that. is, as long as no probl em of different tension between them 
occurs. One other, less admirable, purpose of the consrruction is to produce 
a fnbric at less cost by using cheaper yarns in the less-visible back. 
Another method of producing a heavier fabric tlum is possible in a 
ingle-layered construction is the bnck-warp weave, which adds warp threads 
s
to the back to be interwoven. However, it is a less useful construction than 
the back-filling one, since the warp threads have LO be set very closely and a 
heavyweight warp thread migh t ca use difficulties in the opening of the shed. 
Therefore, this weave is usually reserved for medium-weight fabrics. Again, 
different weaves can he used in from and back, as well as different colors. 
Plates 22,: J Double weaves have a specia l nimbus about them for reasons not clear 
to me. They are thought to be intricate, hard ro grt~sp, open only to advanced 
~tudents. To my mind they are simple to underscand and can be handled 
hy anyone with just common sense- which, I admit, sometimes seems rare. 
ves are fabrics that have two separate layers which ciln be 
Double wea
locked at both sides, at one side, or, within the fabric, at any number of 
places where the design asks for an exchange of top and bottom layers, usu· 
P/11t CS 88, !J!I ally of different colors. There are also triple weilves nnd quadruple weaves, 
and multiple-layered [abrics can be constructed, though they are rarely 
found. Jn ancient Peru, double wc;1ves in complicated designs were made, 
and triple weaves have been found, as well as a small quadruple piece. If a 
no written language, no graph paper, and no 
highly intelligent people with 
pencils could manage such inventions, we should be able - easily I hope -
to repeat at least these structures. 
can be woven with as few as four harnesses when both 
Double weaves 
l 