Designing as Visual 01·ganization 7 5 
li!!;ht and have a color attitude that is non-aggTcssive, no matter what the color 
hue and whether there i~ an ovn-all color or a piny of colors. 
H owever, one factor rnay influence even ou r impulsive choice of color, 
and that is the practica l qu eMion ol' color-fastness w light and, where this is 
necessary, to washing. Dilrcren t colors vary of counc in this respect. The 
coloring matter in textiles i~ a dye that penetrates the fibers ol the material, 
unlike color pigment or paint, which is applied w rhc ~urfrrce only. The ac· 
tion, therefm·c, of the <lye on different tibcrs ha~ to he taken into accoum and 
will affect, in turn, the choke of the rrrw material. Also, the dye proces~ itself 
ha~ w be considered. In piece dyeing, for instance, the whole finished fnbric 
i~ immersed in the dye bnth to give it a uniform color, while in yarn dyeing, 
as the name suggest~. the yam is dyed before it is woven, thereby a llowing n 
fabric to be built of d ifferent color units. Only the latter, as we should be 
aware, allows for t he full realization of the means within the weaver's sphere. 
We have again reached a point where we can think in general terms. for 
the issue of the specilic formal domain within which a craft operates has wide 
implications. Architecture, for instance. is concerned with sprrce: wid1 en· 
closing space, with extending into space, and wi th gravity and tension. 
Though ~culpwral clements (arrangement of masses), painterly clements 
(ligh t, shadow, color), and textmal e lements (inhcrem smrnure or material 
and marks of working it) nrc also present, these shou ld spc<1k on ly quietly. 
not dominantly. Similarly, we can delineate the weaver's province. The 
meaning of the word "textural" covers that quality whidt is the essence of 
weaving. It is the result, apparent on the surface, of the manner in which in­
terdependent thread units are connected w form a cohesive and flexible 
whole. This surface play, of structural origin, can be accentua ted or subdued 
through the choice of yarn rrnd its characterist ir~·- ~lossiness, dullm:ss, knob­
biness, etc.- and of culor. It becomes obvious now, I believe, why the above­
mentioned piece-dyeing process diminishes rather than enhances the quin­
tessence o£ weaving, for it bridges over and thereby obscures with one color 
the separate functions of the structum l elements. 
H. in regard 1:0 visual articulation, texture, produced through the inter­
locking of threads, is the focal point in weaving, those peripheral components 
that can variegate it come only second in the order of importance. Properties 
such as warmth- of paramount importance in textiles used for clothing - do 
not belong to the voc:~bulary of form. There, then, b the quality of the yarn 