The Loom 35 
one to be setup in the United States was in t8 t 3- The effect of the mecha· 
nizcd loom on time -;aved and thereby on increased productivity is beyond 
computation. 
Whi le England concerned itself with the general problem of mechaniz-
ing weaving, France wok up the panicular one of substituting a mechanism 
the drawboy in the operation of the complicated shedding system of the 
for 
pattern loom. Various cffons were made by Bouchon, Fa lcon, and Vaucasson. 
all during, the middle of the eightcem h century, but none of the results was 
pracricable. In t805. however, Jacquard brought out a machine. an improve­
ment on Vaucas'ion's, that proved successful. It rendered the draw-loom's 
shedding apparatus auwmatic by retaining the weiglned lenshes through 
which the separate warp threads ran and by fastening them W wire hooks 
that were raised by wire blades or deflected int o a positiott that prevented 
them from hcing raised - a selection controlled by a chain of cards perforated 
in <t('cor·dancc with the pauern. This cl1<tin rotated around a cylinder which it­
~<.:lf was g iven quartet· wrns by a Lrcadle. llesides the enormous simplification 
that this mechanica l invention meant for figure weaving, it had the advantage 
that de~i!,'TH no longer had to be tied up cord by cord. fly an easy exchange of 
the perforated cards, any design could be woven that was calculated for the 
number of warps within the particular repeats for which the loom was 
equipped hy its leash and cord set-up. Whereas previously, a loom was 
rigged up cumbersomely for one pattern and was repeatedly used for just the 
one, a shift from one to nnother was so easy now that the market became 
oodcd with designs of all kinds. In the struggle for the attention of the 
n
buying public, the manufacturers outdid each other with constant changes of 
design - a situation we are still witnessing today. 
The modern age of power weaving began in earnest when the Jacquard Plate 95 
shedding mechanism was attached to the mechanized loom . In the second 
of the nineteenth centttry, the technical genius of the Western world 
half 
perfected the loom to the point it now has reached. It operates with the speed 
and precision that we expect and enjoy in the instruments that serve us. 
Among the various problems that had tO be solved was a self-acting motion 
to SlOp the loom should a weft thread break or a new bobbin have L<> replace 
one that was used up. Funhermore, ways had to he found to unwind the wnrp 
and wind up the woven cloth automntically. An invention was also neces-
sary u; provide an itlstrument that would stretch the warp threads into the 
width- that is, a tcmplet, which would not need adjusting every few 
exact 