6o On Weaving 
low for a sufficient number of threads in a given space to form a thick mate足
rial. In the plain weave, wool ;tlso becomes harder than it is by natutT. On the 
other hand, it will wear wel l in thi\ ~omcwhat open weave, since al l thread~ 
are closely tied in and are prevemed from hcing ca ught accidentally. Out of 
the interaction hetween silk, the softest of fibers, and a plain weave, the stiff足
est of the basic constructions, l'Omcs taffeta - a silk become sti lL In the 
combination of linen and the plain weave, we had the mutual support ing of 
common traits; in the combination of silk and the plain weave, we have a 
clash of trait~ producing a material with new and distinctive characteristics. 
So striking i~ th is new combination that the p l ;~in weave ncquires still an足
other name when used with silk: the taffeta weave. 
Every weave has, of course, a mater ial that seems best suited to its spe足
cial features; or, the other way around, every fiber has a weave in which its 
specialty seems to be exhibited most advantageously. Wool, for instance, 
which sulfers to sornc degree when used in a plain weave, profits from a twill 
weave. The twill strikes us as most mitahle for clothing purposes, <~nd so does 
wool. A twi ll forms a much more pliable material than docs the plain weave, 
and thus the softness of the wool \\' ill be an:emuated. Also. the more widely 
~paced imersections of warp and weft allow the threads to be set more closely, 
as we noted before, and thus makes for a heavier material, increasing the 
wool's capacity to preserve warmth. One reason for nut using a satin weave 
with wool -a combination which would also make for a soft, plit~ble, and 
closely packed material - is that here the threads float over too many threads 
of either warp or weft to susta in hard wear; they may easi ly be snagged and 
form ungain ly loops on the surface. The twi ll weave strikes just the righ t 
balance of pliability and practirality for wenr. Wool in a twill weave is the 
classical combination we know as tweeds. Twills in cotton form the washable 
materials of onr work clothes - of our overalls for instance - t he firml y 
packed fabrics embodying the typi<:al chnraueristics of borh the cotton and 
the twill. It is no sniking combi nation, but it is suitable enough for many 
purposes. T will woven in silk is another case of hybritl tra its. It results in a 
material that takes advantage neither of the speciil l q uality of silk nor of that 
o[ the twi ll weave. The omcomc, however, is a most useful fabric, though 
one we do not boaSl about: silk linings for coats, suits, etc. h is softer than 
taffeta, not as impractical as satin, and smoother than a rwill woven in any 
other material. Again we see the tw ill appeari ng in our cloth ing materia L 
Other fibers, other constructions, and their various combinations en-