Tapest?y 67 
construction. In fact, it seems as if the emerging awareness of a fabric's use­
fuln ess, when linked with the increased ease of its fabrication, tended to di­
lute its magic potentia lity as an art medium . Throughout the centuries, the 
use of th reads in the language of form has given way more and more to their 
use in service of the pr;tctica l. The utiliwrian side of a fabric's character so 
powerfully dominates our estima te of it today that we easily appraise even a 
tapestry, th()t is, a woven picture. iu terms of its possible practical advantages 
before recognizing its merit as a formulation in pictorial terms, that is, as a 
work dealing with fonn per se. 
Since we know already that only the most versatile principle of fabric 
constm ction can be used to build varied forms in varied placements in varied 
colors and surface ti·eatrnents, we must look for the most basic technique. 
For, with every time-saving device that helped toward f01ster, and therefore 
increased, produn ion. the necessary mecha nization of a specific o peration 
p 
mited the range of the process in general. The most fundamental thread 
li
con~t r uction, ol lOll rse, is the pia in weave: the al ternnt.c interlacing of warp 
and weft threads. But whereas this construction is based on a balanced dis­
tribution of warp and weft and serves today to produce our ba~ic utilitarian 
fabric, namely our millions of y01rds of muslin, tapestry we01ving is based on 
'-balancc d istribution, that is, a widely spaced warp covered by the weft. 
an oA
As noted before, it has the added distinction that the weft does not travel 
from selvage to selvage but moves only within the specific areas of color or 
sur(acc-treatrnem to which it belongs. Jt is the manner of: the interlocking of 
P/nlc.f 59-6 J 
the wefts at the wrning points or at their turn around a war p thread tha t dif­
ferentiates the various tapestry techniques h·om each other and thereby af­
fect~ the forma l ~trucwrc o f the des i~n. 
One of the earliest pictorial work.~ made of thread~ is a weaving- in which 
floating w;wp threads set in a pb in-weave field form the desig-n. It was exca­
Plate 6.J 
vated in 1!)46 by Junius Bird, C ura tor of Archaeolog-y of the American Mu ­
seum of ~alllral History, lew York, at a \itc in northern Peru where he 
found textiles dating- hack to zr;oo u.c . lr sho ws a bird which is thought om 
in regard to form and ~ t ructure with superior intell igence. 'vVe ensi ly forget 
the amazing d iKiplinc of thinkin~ that man had already achieved four dw u­
sand years :tgo. \ Vherevcr meaning has to be conveyed hy meam of form alone, 
where, for instance, no written language exi~ts to impart descri ptively such 
meaning, we lind a vigor in this direct, fonn:11 ive communica tion often 5Ur­
paS.\ing that of culwres that have other, add itional m ethods of transmitting 