-
32 On W eaving 
shafts by making possible the raising of single shafl 'i. The number of weave 
constructions that now could be woven was greally increased, since no t only 
even· but also odd-numbered structural patterns could be undertaken. 
Uy interposi ng levers between treadles and sha(t~. the direct action upon 
I he shafts was changed into an indirect one. Two different shedding met hods 
were developed. One made it possible to rai!)e a single shaft or any given r.om­
bimuion by pre&.<;ing on the treadle. The other operated in such a way as to 
mn ke a single shaft or any combination of shafts form a shed, with the differ­
ence that here the selected shaft~ were raised whi le simu ltaneously all others 
were lowered. T he effort of lifting the weight of the 'ihafts was reduced con­
siderably, .~ince the lower ing of the others made it unnecessary to lift them as 
high as would have been requ ired if the reg ular warp plane had had to be 
maima ined. 
Another elaboration of the shedding mechanism, apparemly also of Chi­
nese origin, was the m mpound harness, which made it possible to weave 
small pattern effects into a d ifferen t background . A ~econd set of shafts was 
placed behind the regulilr set in front of the weaver. The regu lar shaft-; were 
now equipped with heddles that had, instead of small eyes, elon~ated ones. 
Those ~e lected warp thread) th;lt were to he used in forming the pattern were 
pas~ed through the smfl ll eyes of the heddles of the ndded pattern shafrs, as 
well as through the elong-ated ones of the regular shafts in front of the weaver. 
This arrangement permitted the opening of a shed by the commonly used 
shafts independently of the p:1ttern ~hafts. The latter ones could be rai~cd 
when needed, and the warp threads passing through them could affect the 
shed by reason of the long hcddlc eyes of the fron t sh;lfts throng·h wh ich they 
passed. no maucr whether 1hey were rilised or not. The limitil tion of 1he 
compound-harness loom lay in the comparatively srnilll number of pattern 
sllilfts ;md corresponding treadle~ . t11at could be conveniently managed in ad­
d i1 ion to the regular shafts. 
T he various efforts to recapture a freedom that had been lost with the 
introduction of mechanical shedding devices led to the invention of the 
draw-loom, which < tl lowcd the weaving of figured designs by mechanical 
means. This invention. thought to be of Persian origi n, wlls, like the one dis­
cu~sed before,:~ modification of the shedding appl i<mces. It was of far greater 
comequence, however, for it inaugurated a new era of figure weaving. I n· 
stead of shafts performing the shedding motio n, there was a return to single 
w<~rp thread operation, though now, after man y centuries, by mechan ical 