20 On W eaving 
wut by a framework or stakes in the ground. Early Egyptian records show 
weaving on such a loom which, in vertical position. is also the tapestry loom 
of today. 
Another loom, allowing for subtl y adjustable tension, therefore finer 
weaving, is the back-strap loom, in which the lower bar is attached to a belt 
around the wa is1 of the weaver, who. leaning forwilrd or backward can tighten 
or slacken the warp. This loom made possible the extraordinary textile 
athievcments of pre-Columbian Peru and is still found in remote regions of 
Asia and parts of Central and South America. 
The intersecting weft, crossing between raised and lowered warps, was 
first inserted without tool, the extra length being wound into little bundles, 
as today in tapestry weaving; i.e., pictorial weaving. Later the weft was 
wound onto sticks and released as it tniVcrsed the warp. Fina lly, to introduce 
the weft faster and in greater length, it was wound on bobbins, inserted into 
boatlike shuttles, and thrust across the opened warp (the shed) in ha nd as 
well as in power looms. 
To beat t.he weft into place, a weaver's sword of wood was an early instru­
ment. Later a comb like "reed" was introduced, combining warp spacing with 
pounding of the weft. Suspended from the loom fntmework, the reed swings 
against the woven fabric, pressing successive weftS against it. 
A first device for speeding up the selection of warps between which the 
weft passes was the shed-rod, carrying raised warps. To raise the opposite 
warps. an ingenioW> device, called a heddle, was imroduced. The warps run­
ning under the shed-rod were tied with string-loops to a second rod, the hed­
dle-rod, and they now could be raised past those on the shed-rod with one 
upward motion. Later, series of heddle·rods, replacing the shed-rod, facilitated 
the production of weaves based on more complex warp operation than that 
demanded tor the plain weave, based on the principle of opposites. 
In the medieval loom, the heddle-rods, now called shaftS or harnesses, 
were suspended from the framework, similar tO the pounding device, and 
were attached to foot treadles, as they are on hand looms today. They are still 
found on power looms. T hough of incalculable value in saving time, this in· 
limited the thus far unl imited, primitive warp selection . 
vemion 
T o reh'Llin some of the early freedom, the highly developed draw-loom 
was devised. Chinese in origin, developed for elaborate pattern weaving, 
such as brocades and d1unasks, it was later adopted in Europe. I t was super­
seded by a further mechanized warp-selection method, J acquard weaving, still 
L 