7 2 On Weaving 
If, then, it appears tha t our stamp is or should be an immediate or im­
plicit lucidity, a considered position, a reduction to the comprehensible by 
reason or intuition in whatever we touch (confusion a lways gets n negative 
rating), we have established a basis for de~ign ing- designing in any field. 
From city-planning to the planning of :1 house or a road, from the composi ng 
of music to the formulation of a law, the weaving of a fabric, or the painting 
of a picwre- behind the endless list ol things shaped is a work of clarifica­
tion, o~ controlled formulation. 
By using the term "designing" for all these varied ways of pre-establish­
ing form, we are, of course, doing some violence to the word. "Designing" 
usually means ''giving shape to a useful object." We do not speak of design­
ing a picture or a concerto, but of designing a house, a city, a bowl, a fabric. 
But surely these can all be, like a painting or music, works o[ art. Usefulness 
docs not prevent a thing, anything, from being art. We must conclude, then, 
that it is the thoughtfulness and care and sensitivity in regard to form that 
makes a house turn into art, and that it is this degree of thoughtfulness, care, 
and sensitivity that we should try to attain. Culture, surely, is measured by 
art, which sets the standard of quality toward which brond production slowly 
moves or should move. For we cenainly realize that there arc no exclusive 
mate• iab reserved for art, though we arc often told otherwise. Ne ither pre­
ciousnes~ nor durability of material arc prerequisites. A work of art, we 
know, ca n he made uf sand or sound, of feathers or Aowcrs, as much a~ of' mar­
ble or gold. Any material, any working procedure, and any method of pro­
duction, manu;ll or industrial, c;m ~crvc an end that may be art. 1t is interest­
ing to sec how today's artists, for example our sculptors, are exploring new 
media and arc thereby fundamcnwlly ('hanging the sculptural process from 
the traditional method of cutting away to one of joining. They are giving us, 
instead of massive contour, exposed structure; instead of opaqueness, trans· 
mission of light. Obviously, then, regardless of the material and the method 
of working it, designing is or should be methodical planning, whether of 
simple or intricately organized forms; and if done imaginatively and sensi­
tive ly, designing· can become:: an. 
Let us pursue this matter of designing a little further, now that we have 
established in our mind where its beginning lies and where its ultimate goal. 
Since our concern here is to explore the process of designing and not to 
analyt.c the de~ign done, we ~h<,uld try w put ourselves in the po~ition of 
the "doer," the one who is making a thing new in form. It may appear as 
... 