-
76: On Weaving 
that is to make the fabric, whether it is ro ugh or smooth, lustro us, shaggy, 
downy, uneven, etc.- qualities that arc able to underline the structural 
appearance of the fabric or to rcstraill i1. Today, with the red iscovery of tex· 
tural inlcrc~t. this secondary elcmcllt of composition, yarn character, is often 
used as a sub~titute for the primary one, wh ich is structural in natLtrc. As a 
resul t, we find an exaggerated emphasis 011 fan cy yarns to make up f01· a 
thread construction that is dull. In fact, this shift from structural effects to 
predominantly yarn effects today holds back a textile development that 
should center on construction as the original focal point. 
Color comes only third in importance among the elements of composi­
tion within the weaver's dimensions. 13y giving different colors to the differ· 
ently functioning threads, the structural chnracter of the weaving will be 
intensified. In addition, w lor, more ncute ly than texture, conveys emotional 
va lues; hut, if it is introduced ;1s too-independent an agent, it may carry the 
weaving ou tside of its own territory into the painterly province. When color 
in weaving moves into a first place, suppresc;ing the main textile ingred ients, 
we lind a regression of the art of weaving. Examples, historical and contem­
porary, may be found in some of the pictorial tapestries woven from painters' 
designs - Raphael's, Picasso's, Rouault·s. etc. Many of these works, lacking 
in textural and structunll interest, have moved to the very edge o f the weav­
er'c; rea lm ; and, though perhaps impressive as pictorial compositiom, they 
are often o f little consequence as pictures or as wcavings. 
< lre ready, I believe, to resume work on our particular task. We have 
We 
found ourselves limited to a definite rnnge of raw material and of color and 
have been led to a suitable thread wnstrut:tion. the plain weave. Now th;lt 
we have become aware of the interplay of fiber, color, and weave, let us see 
where another step in the act of condensation will take us. 
In regard to fiber, we found linen, raflia, and a strawlike synthetic fiber 
acceptable. Of these, linen is bestc;uited ac; warp mate,·ial here. It reeommend5 
itself for the purpose at hand by its rela tively ine lastic charilcter, which les­
sens the chance th<~t the fabric may stretch <mt of shape or sag. l n addition, 
linen has a natural color that is a grayi~h t:ln. It has this to say for itself: it will 
not fade even when exposed to light for :1 long period; it has an easy color-re­
lationship to any woodwork - floors, for instance -and its color will show 
dust less readi ly than most; it is mothproof though not mildewproof. The 
slight stiffness of the linen fiber will incrcnse th<~t of the plain weave construc­
tion and al~o will add w the porousncss that has been found desirable. When 