56 : On W eaving 
At its beginning, a work had thus been given an even spacing, and this was 
re·established as the work progressed. This twined beginning is found in 
many of even the elaborately woven pieces of later periods. It is a technique 
used today mainly with stiff fibers, for window-shades, mats, e tc.; th<~t is, it is 
no longer in the main stream of textile development. In fact, it ceased to be 
in it a very long time ago. Nevertheless, it is, I believe, worthwhile to experi­
ment with it for specified uses that may come up, or just for the sake of 
strengthening an underst<U.lcling of structural textile processes. 
The advantage oE weaving becomes clear now. The weft, here a single 
thread, ca n be packed closely, resulling in a compara tively tight yet light 
fa bric. On the o ther hand, it confines the resultant material to rectangularity; 
the width limited by the reach of the weaver's hands in inserting the weft, 
the length lim ited only by the amount of warp materinl that can be carried 
ou the warp beam and of cloth that can be held by the cloth beam. T his type 
of interlacing proved suited to devices such as the heddle, later the tread le, 
whirh gradua lly made possible ever-increasing speed and with it an un· 
imagi ned abundance of fabri cs, both in regard to sheer quantity and also in 
regard lO variety. Weaving outstripped all other textile techniques for thou­
sand~ of ye:-~rs, but today we may begin to wonder whether it in turn may not 
be ovcnaken by other methods moving tO the foregrou nd, such as knilting, 
perhaps, or a process of pouring re~emhling paper-making. 
Plaiting, or braiding, is ano ther cad y technique, the term " braiding" 
referring mually to narrow bands of fa bric. It is still with us today, used in 
the fabrica tion of floor-mats for instance, or braid~ of conrse. It is a multiple­
element technique, though not of the warp-weft sy~tern kind, for here warp 
turns into weft and becomes warp a~ain in a continuo us exchange as the 
threads interlace themselves. In Peru. braids of amnzingly intricate planning 
and grea t bea uty have been excavated, which testify to the specific textile 
involvement of thnt culture. (For a deta iled analysis of br<1iding technique 
sec Rao ul d'Harmurt, Ciba Review, Vol. 12, No. t g6, February tg6o; and, by 
the sante author, T extiLes of A 11c:ie11 I Peru a111/ their T etlmiq ues.) 
Pi le fabrics also had an ear ly beginning. They reached a high point with 
t hc wcavi nP, or rugs- that is, of heavyweight mat<.:rials- in th <.: East, mainly 
of counc in Persia. T he simplicity of the techn iquc allows for greatest freedom 
of desig11, a freedom far beyond that or other weaving techniques. The Per­
Plait'S 26, 9] 
sian and Turkish knots of which the rugs are made are short ends of wool 
looped around two adjacent warp threads and pulled between them to the 
L 