Modified and ComjJosite Weaves : 49 
Plate 20 
15 
preserved. Damasks are perha ps the most successful development of the 
satin weave, though there are also twill damasks. H ere, a warp satin is com­
bined with a weft satin or, less strikingly, a warp twill with a weft twill, one 
form in~ the ground, the other forming pat.terns, often o( floral design- a 
favorite for centuries. Since, in satins, the Awning warp or weft threads cover 
either warp or weft more completely than in twill combinations, the pattenl 
appears clearly; and as silk or a fine linen is usually used, a luxurious fabric 
results. Sin<:c, too, larger pattern areas arc desirable here than arc feasible 
with the 4-, 8-, 6-, or even .harness looms, the J acquard loom is preferred 
1
24
for dam<~~k weaving. 
Plates 20, 21, SJ 
Corded weaves belong to another group that is clearly derived from 
basic constructions, for the raised-rib appear.-.nce is the result o( a surf.-.ce 
weave of plain weave, twill, or sati n. In order to produce the corrugated ef· 
feet, which may he in either warp or weft, threads are left floating :at certain 
intervals and then incorporated again into the weave, allowing an extended 
surface we.-.vc to be pushed tightly to the unwoven section of the resting 
threads. IL is advisable to use two warp beams for these differently engaged 
threads, which otherwise will easily produce divergent tension. 
To further incre:lse the three-dimensional effen of the cords, stuffing 
threads that lie between surface and lloats can be added without d ifficu lty. An 
Pltlltl ~I 
extension of this type o( weave construction is the " Piisse" weave, where a 
fold in the fabric is achieved by first weaving a section of the chosen weave, 
then continuing with a section in which part of the warp is floating in back, 
and then rejoining the fi rst part by pushing the latter section against the al­
ready completed part , thus making it hang over inste<td of merely forming a 
raised cord in the manner discussed earlier. 
A group of weaves slightly m tt\ide of the general line or construnion is 
Pl!llt:H 
that of the mock leno weaves. r I ere 1 he threads of w<~rp as well as weft are 
grouped in such a manner as to fall together in little bundles, where they act 
together in one group and are held apart from another g-roup which acts op­
positely. Thus a lacy, open dfect results, which may be c111phasized by thread­
ing Lhe warps in the reed, gToupcd togerhcr in accordance wil11 the dr.-.ft 
where they fall togcthct·, and with open spaces left in the n•ed where they 
separate due w the construCtion. 
Crepe weaves, too. are developed [rom the basic weaves, but they ditfer 
from the previously discussed constructions by aiming at an appenaru;e Lhat 
avoids directional patterns or a ~rnooth surface, but t<tther at one that g·ives a 