T actile Sensibility 63 
stirnulm that may touch o[ our uea tive impulse, such as unformed material, 
materia l "in the rough." 
Concrete substances ami also colors per se, words, tones, volume, space, 
motion - these constitute raw material; and here we still have to add that 
to which our sense of wuch responds- the surface quality of rnauer and its 
consistency and structut·c. The very fact that terms for these tactile experi­
ences arc tnissing is sip;nilicant. For too long we have made too little use of 
the naeclium of tactility. Mal ii:re is the word now usuall y understood to mean 
the surface appearance of material, such as grain, roughness or smoothness, 
dullness or gloss, etc., qualities of appearance that can be observed by touch 
and arc consequently not concerned with Iighmess or darkness. There seems 
to be no common word for the tactile perception of such properties of ma­
terial, related to inner strut:t.u n:, as pliabi lity, spongine~s. briuleness, porous­
n ess, etc. 
Smface quality of material, that is, matiere, being mainly a quality of ap­
pearance, is an aesthetic quali ty and therefore a medium of the anist; while 
quality or inner structure is, above all, a matter of function and therefore the 
concern of the scientist and the engineer. Sometimes material surface together 
with material structure arc the main components of a work; in textile works, 
for insta nce. speci fically in weavings or, on another scale, in works of archi­
tecture. Parallel to this overlapping of outer and inner characteris1ics in a 
work is the overlapping of artistic, scien tific, and technological interests on 
the part of the weaver or the architect. The pendulum of their wo• k swings 
from art to industrial sc ience. 
Structure, as related co (unction, needs our intellect tO construct it or, 
analytically, to decipher it. Malifh·e, on the other hand, is mainly non-func­
tiona l, non-util itarian, and in that respect, like color, it cannot be experi­
enced intellectually. Ic has co be approached, just like color , non-analytically, 
receptively. lt asks to be enjoyed and valued for no other reason than its 
intriguing performance of a play of surfaces. 13ut it takes sensibility to re­
spond to nwliere, as it docs to respond to color. .Just as only a trained eye and 
a receptive mind are able to discover meaning in the language of colors, so it 
takes these and in addition an acute sensitivity to tactile articulation to dis­
cover meaning in that of matiere. Thus the task today is w train this sensi­
tivity in order to regai n a fac.ulty that once was ~o nawrally ours. 
If we want to concentrate, then, on this segment of our work, that is, 
cactility, it is bener to plll on blinders and exclude what might distract us: 