Designing as Visual 0Tganizalion : 77 
intersected by a weft of strawlike synthetic yarn, white and glossy in its orig­
inal state, the dull natural linen will take on life by contrast, and a subtle 
in natural-to-white tones could be developed, as well as a play on the 
play 
scale from dull to sparkling, even light-reflecting. Again, this original white 
wi ll stay white under exposure to light, and the hard surface of the fiber will 
reta in only a small amoum of dust. Since, where large areas are involved, the 
problem of fading is unavoidable, a solution that circumvents dyeing alto­
gether can only be welcomed. The synthetic fiber is mothproof and mildew· 
proof and, intersecting the linen, it will reduce by the percentage of its use 
the mildew problem, unsolved in the case of linen. H ere, now, we have a 
fabric that largely answers the out lined requirements. It formed itself, ac· 
tually, and what remains tO be determined is mainly the forma l organization 
of the elements. 
Vve now have arrived at that st::tge of designing which demands our finest 
"ea r," for we must try to discern the formal currents of our period in history 
that are on the verge of crystall izing and that may become part of our lan­
guage of form, or may again become part of it. T exture- the word I tried to 
use only in its exact meaning and avoided in its fashionable, loose sense - is, 
for instance, one of the formal elements that has been of little or no interest 
long time but has again become one of today's stylistic components. We 
for a 
must learn to sense those clements of form that respond to our formal needs. 
W e like things today that are light - light as the opposite of heavy and light 
as the opposite of dar k. W e must learn to detect, in particular occ:~sions, 
manifcstil tions of general developments; that is, we must learn lO foresee. And 
to foresee we need a contemplative state of mind. 
To return to our wall-covering project: with the matter of formal com­
position, the general air that the fabric is to have becomes the center of our 
concern. W e have in our hands powerful means of articulation - directional 
elements such as verticals, horizontals, diagonals, squares, as basic examples, 
in the weaver's terms, warp or weft stripes, twills, checks, etc. We arc able 
or, 
to convey impressiom of height, of width, of boldness, of reticence. of gaiety or 
somberness, of monumentality or caprice, all within, though modified by, the 
thus-far established framework. For the subservient character we have sought 
for the fabric from the start directs our decisions and precludes loud in­
strumentation. 
pronounced lineation and contours 
Again, we are here led away from 
toward a surface active only through the slight optical vibration of intersect-