The L oom 29 
thread-relationship has been exploited barbarously. By setting the warp 
threads wider apart than the corresponding weft threads require for a sound 
construction and by spacing the weft equally sparingly, yam can be saved and 
cost thereby reduced. To give the material a semblance of firm ness, it is fin­
ished with a size - that is, a coating of paste that holds the too-loose threads 
in place, at least until their first contact with water. This makeshift practice 
the recent development of new finishes which, far from 
has led, however, to 
being unsound, are ndding valid new textile properties to the (abric to 
which they are applied. 
Much earlier, another fusion of a batten and a warp-spacer existed. It is 
stil l in use today in the form of an implement for tapestry and pile rug weav­
ing; that is, for work done on upright looms where only short sections of the 
filling have to be compactly beaten into place while at the same time the po­
sition of the warp thre:.~ds is adjusted. This is a comblike instrument with a 
handle - a beater-in. It is found in many places, among them India, Persia, 
Minor, Egypt in Roman times, and America before the Conquest. 
Africa, Asia 
It is also found tOday among the Indians of the Southwest. Surely, it was also 
used in Europe in lhe weaving of the gTeat medieval tapesu·ies. It is of wood 
or metal or a combination of both. The dems are pushed between the warp 
threads and pressed or beaten onto the wefts or the knots of a r ug. A batten 
between the warps would undo the knots. In ancient America, it 
inserted 
was a much-needed instrument, in addition to the swordlike batten, for work 
-strap looms. For, customarily, the weaving was started from 
done on bac k
both ends and worked toward a meeting point. When this point w:~s ap­
proached, the batten had to be discarded, for the warp no longer permitted 
the entry even of narrow battens. Here the beater-in cook over, sometimes in 
the form <)f just a comb. Wilh it~ teeth reaching between the warp threads, 
however short their exposed section may have become, it could push the wefts 
into place, even when they had almost closed the gap in the weaving. 
ere we have arrived at :1 point where we should take st.ock o( what had 
H
thus far. At this stage, the loom was equipped with warp 
been achieved 
bea m, cloth bcarn, heddlc-rods, shed stick, lease or cross rods, batten or beater­
in, and (in the Pacific region) a back strap. Looking back today, we arc aware, 
in awe, that it contained all the essentials o£ the loom as we know it in our 
own time. It was the loom of ancient Peru, for i'nstance, on which the great 
masterworks of the textile art were woven. In Peru it did not have any further 