The Loom 27 
had to undergo further development and even merge its funn ion with an­
other one before finding a place there. Of the two basic components of its 
pre~ent form we have found one lO be a wol for beating the wehs into place. 
To isola te the other, we have co retrace again early stages of development. 
W e find that the spacing of the warp created a special problem. On short 
warps it was solved by lacing heading cords along the ends of the warp, gen­
eral ly using heavier thread for this than for the rest of the fabric. Either they 
were interwoven, and their greater bulk held the warp threads in place; or, 
in an earlier phase of development, they were twined; that is, two ends of a 
doubled cord were twisted in such manner across the width of warp that each 
single warp thread was caught between the twists -an expedient way of dis­
tributing the m evenly. These heading cords, in addition to their main func­
tion of spacing, also gave a sturdy end ing to early fabrics woven on warps 
that were continuous and not, as in our manner of working, cut. For longer 
warps, this method of spacing proved insufficient, and lease-rods (or laze-rods 
or cross sticks) were introduced. These are two rods, tied rogether at the ends, 
placed ne;1r the warp beam and behind heddle and shed-rod, each carrying 
the warp threads of one of the two basic sheds in the given order: one all the 
even-numbered threads, the other all the odd-numbered ones. The friction 
by the rods keeps the threads from crossing and helps hold them in 
caused 
position. It also makes it easy to find the allocated place for a broken thread. 
For this latter function, a lease cord instead of the lease·rods was used on short 
warps. 
An actual warp-spacer is known to have existed in Egypt, for instance, 
and in Borneo, but it seems not to have been widely used. It is an instrument 
of wood, as long as the warp is wide, with dents of wood or reed fastened ro it 
through which the warp threads are drawn, thus spacing them as desired. 
Since a warp-spacer as separate instrument does n oc belong to the general line 
of development, it is mentioned here only bec<1use of the importance it gained 
when it made its appearance in combina tion with the batten. 
T o summarize: the present-day batten encompasses two functions, tha t 
of pressing the weft into place and that of spacing the warp. It is an apparatus 
that arrived on the scene when mechanization of the loom had advanced well 
beyond the early stages discussed before. In order w be manageable, it needed 
a loom with a framework from which it cou ld be suspended or secured in 
such manner as to swing freely. 
Its shape is predominantly that of a warp-spacer. The dents through 