40 On W eaving 
still further arc stripes in ei thcr warp or fi II ing ;md, one step further, d 1crked 
effects, another o f the mo~t typica l designs of wcavin~ in a plain weave. But 
beyond these elemental formative additions. the condensed quality of this 
weave, its usc of only cssenti:1l co111ponents, pred isposes it also to be the con ­
struction used in work of a pic to ria I e lla rnctcr, that is, in tapestries. I t~ short· 
coming for such a purpose- the necessity o f' having 1.0 deal wi th a 111 ixturc of 
warp and weft- is overcome by deviating from the ha lan<ed proportion of 
warp and fill ing and using d isproportionately more filling. lly 'IXI<.ing the 
warp so widely that the weft <·a n be beaten wgcther closely, it is pm~iblc to 
cover the warp up entirely; the filling thereby becomes the sole agent of the 
surracc. Gothic t<•pcstries, those of the Renaissance, Aubus~on wpcstries -
all are executed in this simplest or constnH.:tions. The old truth applic~ here 
aga in - a process reduced to just the tssential allows for the bromlc::st appli­
C<•tion . 
Another construction, <llso fundamenta l in its simpl icity though already 
Pltllcs 11, 1 ), 1.1 one ~tcp nearer complexity, is the twill weave. WhcrC<L~ tin: plain wcnvc is 
c~sentially a balanced weave- that i~ . warp and weft take an equa l part in it 
and consequently produce the '><lllle appearance on the face of the fabric a~ on 
the bark the twill can he either" hillnnced or an unbalanced weave. It is 
unbalanced when e ither warp or filling is predominant, and in th;n cao;c the 
face and hack of the clmh arc the rrvcnc of each other. For where r·he !Il l inp; 
cover~ TliO'it of the surface, the back naturall y shows for the most p:1rt warp, 
and vice versa. A twill in which the warp prcvaih on the surf< u:c is calkd ac­
cordingly a warp twill, and the one that sho\vs on the face more fillin g than 
warp. a fill ing twill. 
The principle of construction in a twill is that the sun:essivc filling 
threads move over one warp thread or over a f:,'TOttp o f warp threads, progres­
sively placing this thread or gToup of thrc<Jd'i one wilrp thread to the rig ht or 
left of the preceding one. T hus, in the smallest filling twill , which covers 
three warp and three filling threads, the first warp thread is rai~ed ove r tile 
first filling thread, which floats over the second and third warp threads: the 
second warp thread is raised over the ~econd filling thread, which covers the 
st and third wt11·p threads; the third wilrp thread runs over the third Iii ling 
fir
thread, which now floats over the fi rst and second warp threa ds. This manner 
o( intersecting Wilrp and Weft prodU('C'i di~tinct diagonal lin es, thC Charac­
teristic twill lines. In a warp twill of the same size, the proportion or warp 
and filling on the face of the fabric will be reversed. T he first and second 