Modified and ComjJosite W eaves : 51 
layers are plain weaves: two are designated to operate the warp threads of the 
upper layer, two those of the lower one. Usually the first and third threads J.>e. 
long to the upper set, the ~econd and fourth to the lower set. The first weft 
will cross with the first thread of the upper warp, return as second weft, and 
cross with the second warp thread, that is, with the first of the lower layer. T o 
do this, warps 1 and 3 of the upper layer h<tve to he lifted out of the way tO· 
gether with number tj, not active now. The third weft now returns to the 
upper layer and intersects with warp thread 3• thus completing the plain­
weave unit of the top layer. By returning as weft tj, it crosses under warps 1 
and )! of the upper layer ami warp 2 of the lower one ;mel t•ngagcs now warp 
4. thus completing the plain-weave unit of the lower set. This is the complete 
cycle, forming a dou ble-laycrcd fabric of plain weave closed at both selvages. 
A three-layered plain-weave rnaleri;tl demancls six harnesses, a quad ruple 
one eight, two for each layer, wh ile a double weave in a 2/1 twill wi ll need six 
hamcsse~. three for each layer. It is easy to devise further possibilities, all of 
w hirh fol low the same reason in g. 
By r hanging the sequence of weft operation, <1 fabric can be mClde to 
open at the sides, thus making it possible to weave a fabric that unfolds to 
twice the width of the warp on the loom, three times the width, or even 
wider. The procedure here, it it is a plain-weave doul.>le weave, is to have the 
first weft weave the first plain-weave part of the top layer; next, the first part 
of the lower layer: then complete that layer by weaving the second plain­
weave pan; and then return to the tOp layer, completing there the plain­
weave unit. 
Aside from the purpose of producing hy this method wide fabrics on 
no1rrow looms, wcavings of three or more plies are designed in order to en­
lar~e the wlor exchange of solid color areas in a fabric- a red crossing with 
a red warp thread, a blue with a blue- insteild of having mixed <~reas where. 
for instance in plain weave. red crosses blue. 
One type of weaving not yet discussed is brocade. Brocade weaves arc not 
derived from any basic construction but have surface threads added to a basi<: 
weave lO enri('h the appearance of the fabric. There ;are warp brocades and 
weft brocades, hoth havinf.;' in common design effe<:t.~ due to floating, addi­
tiunnl threads. A simi lar effect can be produu::d by embroidery, where 
thread~ <~n' aim added to a found<~tiun wc<tve. In a brocaded fahric, however, 
these added threads do not cross from area to area but run strictly parallel 
to the weft in weft brocade or, in warp brocade, to the warp. 