26 : On W eaving 
JimiLi ng e!t:ment, l'or it channels thread construction and composition of a 
weave into a shedding system that permits with in its scheme only limited d e­
velopment. Centuries and even mil lennia had to pass before some of the 
lost freedom of earlier shed formatiom could he regained through more in­
n·icate machinery. 
So far we ha ve t:Jken up matters concerning the warp; we now come to 
the weft. The first, most elementary, way to introduce the weft thread or 
threads between the warps was, and s l ill is today in tapestry weaving, by n o 
other means than the fingers. A length of thread is laced over and under the 
~trctched warp threads or inserted into the open shed. With longer weft~. 
wider weavings, and a speeding-up process came the idea of winding the weft 
yarn onlO a stick that could carry it faste1 · through the shed (rom side to side 
of the weaving. Hand in hand with the development of the loom went the 
development of weft carriers- ~huttles. But at the point that we have now 
reached. a stick, sometimes delica tr ly finished and ornamented, was all that 
had evolved. 
More intricate than the matter or inserting the wefl was that of pressing 
it into place, firmly and evenly, all across the width of the fabric. With the 
changing of the shed, the warps hold the weft when they close over it. Fingers 
soon will have proved inadequa te instruments for this ph:1se of work. T hus a 
tool had to he fashioned - flat enough to be entered into an opened shed, 
smooth enough to glide easily along the warp threads, firm enough not to 
bend under pressure, long enough to reach all across the warp and slightly 
beyond to pen11i1 it to be easily held. Finally, it lwd to have a bl<ade li ke, 
though hlunt. cdgt~ along one ~ide of its length for rcat:hing deeply into the 
angle of the opened shed. Such specified qualities, when takinf); shape clearly 
and simply, not only result in a serviceabl e object, but also convey in its 
lonn thoughtfulness and purity - that i~. beauty. This beater-in or batten is 
truly h<'autihll, even when not considered for its virtues as an artifact. For its 
swordlike appe;nance, it is rightly named the weaver's sword. 
Once the bauen had been developed in answer to a specific need, it was 
put to a further service wh ich 111ade use of its genera l, if not its particu lar 
characteristics - for any flat, long, smooth piece of wood might have done 
eq ually well. This secondary use was that of keeping open or even enlarging 
the shed once it w;1s raised, by settin~ the batten in it on edge. 
Though the \veaving eq uip111ent worked out thu~ far is found in essence 
~ti l l in usc today ilS an intrinsic part of IJIIr weaving machinery. the batten 
L 