Em·ly T echniques ofT hread Interlacing: 57 
front. After a row of knots has been inserted across the whole width, one or 
two wefts in plain weave are introduced. The knots and also the wefts are 
beaten sectionally into pla<:e with a heavy, forklike tool. After several rows 
have been completed, the surface is she;~ red. 
Since each single knot can be of a different color, the design possibili­
ties of pile fabrics are p ractically unlimited. A pointillist design would per­
haps come closest to the technical potential, though it wou ld of course b e 
very time-consuming. Largely as a result o f this consideration, today's hand­
knotted rugs are based on designs that include large Hat areas and thus make 
only a limited use of this ingeniously simple invention. 
Ve lvets, o f course, are also pile fabrics, though here the warp forms the 
pile. They arc a late, high ly sophisticated development, and they can be made 
only on specially equipped looms. 
Since steps toward mechanization often seem to bring limitations as well 
as advantages, we shou ld look back at the regularly shaped fabric brought 
about by we~1v ing to see if anything has been lost on the way. Early practices, 
as well as practices still in use in the hand-weaving areas of regions not yet af­
fected by ·w estern industrialization or ·western concepts, include the shap­
ing of weavings. T here are ;ul<:ient pre-Columbian shins that are, by adding or Plate 29 
dropping warp threads, woven wider at the shoulders than at the waist (the 
pre-Conquest version of our padded-shoulder look). T here are shirts from 
present-day Guatemala that are woven with wider-spaced wefts at the \Vaist, 
to make them fold more easily under a belt. And there are the shaped 
shou lder-scarfs called quechquernill. a pre-Conquest type of g:mnent, from 
the sta tes or Puehla and Hidalgo, ]'vfexico. ln the process of construction, 
these are given a three-dimensional form by an intricate manner of wenving 
Plate 27 
around a corner. (See Bodil Christensen: "Otomi Looms and Quecbquemitls 
from San Pablito, State of Puebln, and fro111 Santa Ana Hueytlalpan, State 
of Hidalgo, Mexico," Notes on Middle A merican Archaeology and Et.hnology. 
Carnegie Institu tio n or ~Washington, Division of H ist.ori<.:al Research, No. 78, 
Janu ary 20. 1947.) 
T oday this problem of shaping, usua lly linked to clothing, is effectively 
solved by the process of knitting, which is moving more and more to the fore­
ground . Our nylons, our u·nderwear, even (urlikc fabrics are now produced 
by that process. Besides the advantag·c of shaping, the time-consuming warp 
preparation of weaving is here eliminated, and the elasticity of the product 
suits our present-day needs better in many cases than the stable fabrics result-