-
3 : On Werwing 
4 
Other names connected \vith the problem of mechanizing the loom 
were De Cennes, who in tG7R came forward with an invention which, how­
ever, was of no practical use, and .Jrm·f Mason, who in tG87 patented an idea 
concerning draw-loom mechanization. 
The invention of the fly shtH tic was of far-reaching sign i fica nee because it 
achieved the mechanization of one phase of weaving - the insenion of the 
weft. Every ~tep toward this mcch:miza tion - from the interweaving o[ loose 
threads by hand, to the p;ming o f a stick carrying the weft from side to side 
of' the weaving, to the hand shuttle with a hohbin of tlnead in it thrown by 
hand from selvage to selvage, and finally to the fly shuttle - represents a 
time-saving device. With this last contrivance, the shuttle is prope lled 
through the opened shed by pulling the curd of n driving device and abruptly 
arresting the motion. When the shut tle reaches the opposite side, it is 
caught by a simil<1r driver that returns it in the s~nne manneL The shuttle 
runs along a projecting ridge of the lower part of the batten, differing here 
from the hand-thrown shuttle, whirh lig-htly pas~es over the lower warp 
threads o[ the opened shed. Kay's invention inc reasecl the speed of weaving 
three or four times and thereby not only alfected the <pwntity of produnion 
but, in wnsequenre, also reduced the price of the fabric. lmport:mt, too. 
was the fact that now it was possible fur one weaver to do work th<1 t previously 
abrics wider than one person could reach. 
needed two, in the weaving of f
His invention, like that of Miillcr. aroused the fea r and anger of the weavers, 
and he only bm·el y escaped their fnry. His son, Robert Kay, elaborated on 
invention and developed th e mul tiple shuttle box for ;m exchange of 
the 
shuttl es in varying colors ot· other di~t.inctions of yarns. Sig nificaut as was the 
part the By shutlle pl <tyed in hand weaving, it was of still greater consequence 
later on as part of the operation of automatic looms. 
A decisive point in the mechanization of the loom was reached when 
Cartwright, who patented a power-driven loom in 1783 and an improved 
model in 178G, ~et up nineteen such looms. Power was first supplied hy an ox 
harnessed to a r.;apstan and later by steam. Though his life was not threat­
ened, he shared the misfortune of the earlier inventors, for he saw thi~ first 
weaving mill destroyed by fire. 
Many contribmions front ntan y sides were necessary before the loom was 
ready to take a vital part. in the industrial development that made England 
for a time the greatest producer of textiles. Only with the beginning of the 
nineteenth century were power looms introduced in any quantity. The first 