T
Expressionism
light directly, subordinating
even paint (pigment)—
or at least sublimating it
as far as
possible. The first
steps toward such a concept
were made intuitively by the
construc-
means of expression was intro-
Abstract painting. The problem of pure color as a
tivist painters.
Their practice reached a
technical first stage in the airbrush
technique
and
duced by the post-impressionists (Cezanne, Seurat, van Gogh and Gauguin) the
and in the
photogram (Fig. 15). On polished
surfaces, metals, synthetic
materials, etc.,
expressionists (“Brucke," Munch, Rouault). But already the impressionists and, more
there
were sprayed very thin, iridescent,
flowing layers of paint, to
which the reflecting
consciously, Cezanne and the fauves (Matisse, Derain) used color for its psychophysical
layer
underneath gave an ethereal,
fluctuating appearance (Fig.
16).
quality, and for space-representation. Cezanne's pictures can be seen as exact and
The use of transparencies, the
ability of the colors to change
with subtlest differen-
vital representations advancing and receding
of nature which are created solely by
tiation through a nearby
color, etc., enriches considerably
the scope of new space
color as
colors. In making such spatial structures, Kandinsky went further. He used an
relationships.
existence of its own, creating with it a new visual tension. This tension is measurable,
These
actual reflections and mirrorings
bring the surroundings into the
picture,
to a certain extent, in the warmth and cold, nearness and distance, lightness and heavi-
| attaining
15. Photographic surface treatment through this a pliability of
surface which has been striven for
ever since
ness, centrifugal and centripetal energies, and lux-values of the color (Fig. 13). by light: a "photogram," made
without
the first days of impressionism.
camera (by L. Moholy-Nagy).
a
It is interesting to note that one the new discoveries can be seen as an isolated
not of
Improvisation fact. All For of the early Matisses
13. W. Kandinsky, 1913. are built upon a predecessor’s work. instance, some This is the recording light —
of as it hit a projection screen in this cose, the sensi-
No. 30 (warlike theme). rive layer of the photographic
paper.
pictures.
and Kandinskys can be regarded as “close-ups” of a detail of Cezanne's
Almost the same things can be found in neoplasticism, Suprematism and construct
—
ism in relation to cubism; especially if we look at them from the viewpoint of space.
The surface becomes a part of
the atmosphere, of the atmospheric
background;
Cubism was already a new approach to space, expressed through revolving objects, a
it sucks up light phenomena —
produced outside itself a vivid contrast
to the classical
new conception of pictorial elements of motion. This was
space, which included the
conception of the picture,
the illusion of an open window.
continued more
consciously by the new painter generation.
This stage marks
the close of impressionism; it represents
the mastery of the surface,
not for atmospheric,
but for plastic, spatial ends.
Neoplasticism; Suprematism; Constructivism. With a more integrated approach
to every event in life, the neoplasticists, suprematists and constructivists have clearly
understood their materials, and have tried to organize them. They have departed
entirely from the traditional desire to mirror nature. They have tried to use the visual
means of expression projection of order and harmony, without that distortion
for the
means are obscure 16. L. Moholy-Nagy.
of the unique meaning of visual means which is inevitable if the Transparent
Rho 50a (Construction
on Rhodoid). 1936.
by associations with the objects of the external world. The work of renovation is a
The new plastics allow new
new evaluation of color, its optical energy, visual illusion and after-image, which a type of visual expression to develop.
Glass-like
sheets, pliable, con
be curved convex and concave. They can be perforated
so that
are the means of a new kinetic space-time rendering.
light ond pigment will
be fused into a new unity. Artificial light
sources (spotlights,
an intensified intuitive search, this work has resulted in all-embracing struc-
Besides
moving lamps)
can continuously change the composition.
This kind of picture is most
probably the
psychological associations, i.e., sentimental values. passage between easel painting ond light
tural relations, in place of the usual display, a new type of
moving pictures.
relation-
The new approach has tried to eliminate all such values in favor of pure color
ships. It has stood for direct expression, as well as for the value of seeing everything
The final
simplification of the picture.
as related. This has become the activating force in the construction of a new life.
14. P. Mondrian. Composition, 1934.
Beginning with the French Revolution the idea of truth wos one of the funda-
The projection screen.
Here is to be found the interpretation
of Malevich's last
mentals of XIX century ideology. The "truth of the two dimensional plane" belongs
picture— the
plain white surface,* which constituted
an ideal plane for kinetic light
to pointing. This perhaps of the reasons why the romanticists and later the
is one
and shadow
effects which, originating
paint entirely flot without the usual modeling of objects. in the surroundings, would fall upon In
impressionists started to it. this
that in to the really elemental color sensa-
Mondrian's significance is order enjoy way,
Malevich’s picture represented
a miniature cinema screen.
yellow blue, the subtractive
tion, he reduced the color of his palette to red, and
If the projection is directed
on a film sensitive to light, a photograph
or photogram
mixtures of colors, except
primaries; that he sacrificed his knowledge about the
results (Fig.
treatment, which 15).
tinted white and black. He even gave up the use of any surface
psychological
cubism practiced with great delicacy. He put out of action the age-old
It seems— from
the standpoint of technical —
development that a picture painted
and apperceptive meaning of color and changed them over into pure relationships
by hand
is surpassed by the physically pure,
"unblemished’’ light projection.
simplicity he
of spiritual values. With his puritan approach and almost unbelievable
Ever
in since the invention of the motion
created a spiritual greatness to which we can hardly find a corresponding case picture, painters have concerned
themselves
the history of art.
with this problem: projection, motion,
interpenetration of color and light.
Photography
is doubtless a bridge.
which was to be produced through the
One of the aims was to create a new space,
*
Malevich, the great suprematist
painter, at the close of his experimental
work, executed a picture that
— new space created with
relations of the elemental material of visual expression a
was merely a white canvas with
an equally white square painted on it.
38
39