tance had been shifted to their interpretive power. I now understood why they used
unusual combinations of curved, straight and zigzagging lines. This was part of their
visual fundamentals. This was their way of speaking about
language, based upon
their individual happinesses and fears. Lines
their problems, their social consciousness,
I drawing; there were no
became diagrams of inner forces. With ecstasy made a
the sheet
objects only lines, straight and curved. Wheels and bridges scattered on
,
were the only shapes derived from nature. I called the drawing “Build! Build!"
the Hungarian word for it.) This was in 1917-1919.
(“£pits“ is
that lines could have a power beyond me, and that,
From that time on I observed
to them to excess. This helped
if I wished to control them, I had to be careful not use
opportunity for confusion.
me simplify my work. The fewer the lines, the less the
to
hidden law in their rich use of lines, I dared to examine cubist
Now, sensing a
tried to become better acquainted with the futurists and expressionists.
pictures. I also
was able
plane. Today I realize that at the time I
Organization of the picture
which I had already employed myself.
to see in their work no more than the elements
process of maturing. I became
But this was a most productive time of fermentation, a
that “composition
in listening to my own observations. I discovered
more courageous
of color, shape,
an unconscious sense of order in regard to the relations
is directed by
example,
geometrical correspondence of elements. For
position, etc., and often by a
I placed the objects on the ground, directly
some time ago, when painting a still life,
better in this position,
beneath the canvas. I thought I would be able to show them
these objects with the
to more from above. At the same time I wanted to frame
see
of a triangle.
field easel. Thus I painted them to form a kind
two diagonal legs of the
greater
I that this triangle not only created a
After finishing the picture, observed
frame within a frame, but influenced
depth and dominated the composition, being a
All the yellows, blues, and reds
my color scheme and the position of the colors, too.
me see the com-
instinctively organized within small triangles. This helped
had been
contemporary pictures with new eyes.
position" of old and
I looked for new subjects and themes. Glass and
Bored by the old subject-matter,
alcohol burner, semaphore, or iron construction
crystal, salt shaker, T-square, radiator,
— lobsters, and pears.
appeared in my paintings instead of apples,
not carry out my intention.
I found that my sketch for an oil painting did
One day
took scissors. Cut-
shapes pressed into a chaotic arrangement. I
There were too many
degrees,
of the drawing, and turning it at an angle of ninety
ting away some parts
were pasted on a new sheet, the whole had little
I was satisfied. When the remnants
the point of departure. People, accus-
similarity to the still life which I had chosen as
and turned upside
naturalistic schemes, insisted that this “still life,” mutilated
tomed to
feeling
rider on a motorcycle. I protested, but basically I had a
down, looked like a
feeling of the complete autonomy of action. It occurred
of indescribable happiness, a
in a drawing, I could also decide with the same
to me that, if I could make such changes
Suddenly I understood the blue
freedom the shapes and colors in my oil paintings.
simple! With this
blue horses of the expressionists. How wonderfully
faces and
even went
deliberately changed the color schemes of my “still lifes," and
revelation I
eliminated the perspective employed in my former paintings. I
one step further. I
shapes, flat unbroken colors, lemon yellow, ver-
simplified everything to geometrical
milion, black, white— polar contrasts.
painter. That day I sensed
event marked a turning point in my existence as a
This
71