treatment, painting)
chemistry, bjology and physiology. These subjects are taught material (surface
mathematics, physics, The
lecturers on the history of art,
by scholars with special concern for co-ordination. Guest
movements.
philosophy, psychology, etc., widen knowledge of contemporary topics and
After every term a trial exhibition of the students’ work is held, and after an eight or
twelve final thesis is asked for.
terms’ course a
is that every man is talented, that once the elemen-
The basic idea of this education
intellectual power into activity, he will be able
tary course has brought his emotional and
Art is the
to do creative work. This does not mean necessarily that it will be "art."
forced by
expression on the highest level of a cultural epoch, a level which cannot be
comprehensive knowledge of materials, tools, and function makes
any means. But
high quality that a genuine, and not an accidental
possible for all work to be of such a
result will be obtained.
even of "free artists” in
The Institute does not aim at the education of geniuses, or
Institute,
“mass production' starts, in the
Sensory training. Systematic work toward
problems
the old sense. There are too many "free artists” with minor talents and minor
some
material, impressions are amassed,
with a non-art approach. By experience with
have no possibility of making a living. The Institute does not want to add to their
who
knowledge of materials, of
first appearing unimportant. There is a further aim:
often at
must learn to face practical as well as
number. As members of society the students
work with tools and
in plastic handling, in tectonic application, in
the possibilities
spiritual material offered
spiritual problems. If, then, by taking in all the practical and
traditional verbal
— never attained through book knowledge and
machines such as is
this will be
to them during their training, some of them develop into ’’free” artists,
instruction.
long
heir own personal achievement, of which the Institute will be very proud. But as
—
undergo development and
Basic sensory experiences— gained by these exercises
they must see themselves as designers and craftsmen who will
as they are students,
to other experiences.
intellectual transformation, and later are brought into relation
community with new ideas and products. This is the
make a living by furnishing the
sometimes appear
Marwitr (Bauhaus, 1928). skip any stage in experience, though it may
1. Rudolf It is not possible to
realistic basis of the workshop training.
drum with contrasting
Revolving tactile
continual
inarticulate experience, the whole of life is one
desirable. From the first
materials arranged
tactile values;
training. The specialized workshops.
Simultaneous design and architecture
the
indispensable, in human development, to pass through all
growth. Therefore it is
in rows.
pass
The Institute of Design offers five specialized workshops for those who successfully
man
field of sensory activity. Little by little
stages of elementary experience in every
year’s examination. These workshops specialize in:
the first
attains his own way of expression, and finds his forms.
design; product development world at second-hand, removed from
1 . Object majority of people build up their
Since the
most primitive sources
Institute must often fall back upon the
fashion) their own experience, the
2. Textiles (weaving, dyeing,
individual approach.
in order to guarantee an
3. Color (murals, decorating, wallpaper)
advertising art) conscious-
4. Light (photography, motion picture, light display, different impulses which reach
exercises. The physiologist divides the
Tactile
world),
events in the outer
into the exteroceptive (those set up by
5. Modelling (glass, clay, stone, plastics, etc.) ness as sensations
the
structures and from
from muscles and adjacent deep
proprioceptive (those coming
and viscera). But
arising from the internal organs
All workshops are grouped around the main goal: architecture. While in a labyrinth), and enteroceptive (those
these
we keep the
traditional "five senses,” just as
simultaneously receives an architectural education ending language has retained the
special workshop the student our daily
sense,”
We speak also of a "sixth
additional terms will supply him with the special the zodiac” and the "four humors.”
with a Bachelor of Design degree; four "twelve signs of
or
special sense of orientation
These courses include domestic people living close to nature, a
instruction needed for the Master of Architecture degree. which is possessed by
divided into a number of
more than any other, may be
architecture, town and regional planning, landscape architecture, analysis of com- of time. The sense of "touch,”
pain, temperature,
such as pressure, pricking, rubbing,
for schools, kindergartens, hospitals, recreation centers, etc. An architect separately sensed qualities,
munity service
will to create buildings with a unity of interior and exterior. vibration.
with this education be able and
materials principally by means of his sense
textiles, light, and color schemes will in his initial exercises, studies
This means that domestic appliances, furniture, The student,
together, so that he may register as
work- a great variety of materials
"match” one another and the whole. The new architect will know by his previous of touch. He gathers
together into tactile
as possible with them. He puts them
training that only the closest collaboration of art, science, and technology guaran- many different sensations
shop
sensations. After a
related, and some contrasting touch
purposeful in both the physical and socio-biological sense. tables, which contain some
tees an organic building,
elements
experimentation, he is able to assemble these
or longer period of
shorter
to previously planned expression.
way that they will correspond a
in such a
23
22