—
missing factor necessary balance. this
Thus, the sum would supply the to In
—lines plane
way, the components would be derived from the sum from the
—and vice versa. Artistic practice supports this professed rule in so far
as black-white painting—consisting of lines and points—acquires a more
pronounced balance by the addition of a plane (or planes, as the case
may be): lighter weights require the heavier. This need is evident to a still
greater degree in colour painting, a fact well known to every painter.
aim in considerations sort extends beyond attempt
My of this the to
Method
rules. It appears almost
establish more or less accurate to me to be as
important to stimulate discussion about theoretic methods. The methods
of art analysis have been, until now, far too haphazard and, frequently,
too personal in nature. The coming period demands a more exact and
objective way to make collective work in the science of art possible.
Preferences and talents remain different here as well as elsewhere, and
work accomplished by each person can be only in accordance
the with
work program
his powers. For this very reason, a accepted by many is of
especial importance. Here and there arises the idea of art institutes work-
Inter-
national
ing in a systematic way—an idea which will surely soon be realized in
Art
various countries. It can be maintained altogether without exaggeration,
Institutes
that a science of art erected on a broad foundation must be interna-
tional in character: it is interesting, but certainly not sufficient, to create
an exclusively European art theory. Geographic
and other external con-
ditions not
are the important ones in this connection (at least not the only
ones) but,
rather, it is the differences in inner content of the "nations"
particularly in the field of art—which are, in the first instance, the deciding
factor. A sufficient example of this is our black mourning and the white
1
mourning of the Chinese. There can be no greater contrast in feeling for
' Those differences
which require exact examination, not alone in reference to "nation"
but also to race, will
surely be determined with no particular difficulty if the investi-
gation is carried on exactly
and systematically. Nevertheless, in matters of detail, which
not infrequently acquire
unexpected importance, it will often be impossible to remove
insuperable obstacles
—influences which often, in the beginning of a culture, affect
details and lead in some
cases to superficial imitations and thereby becloud further
76 development. On the other
hand, purely external phenomena receive little attention