—
white" is quite as customary with us as "heaven and
colour "black and
deep-lying, and consequently immediately
earth." Yet out of this, a not
two colours can be discovered: both are
recognizable, relationship of the
therefore, perhaps sheds an especially strong light
silence. This example,
between the inner nature of Chinese and Europeans.
upon the difference
years of Christianity, we Christians experience death
After thousands of
or, according my characterization, as a "bottomless
as a final silence, to
Chinese look upon silence as a first step to the
pit," whereas the heathen
1
putting
new language, or, in my way of it, as "birth."
today
The "national" is a "question" which is either underestimated or
superficial-economic
treated only from an external and standpoint; for
strongly
this reason, its negative side comes to the fore and covers up the
other side completely. It is this very other side, that is, the inner, which is
essential. From this last standpoint, the sum of the nations would form not
a dissonance but rather, harmony. Presumably, art would also intervene
in this seemingly hopeless case—this time in a scientific way—unconscious-
ly or involuntarily, with harmonizing effect. The realization of the idea of
organizing an international art institute can become an introduction to this.
I B 2. The simplest forms of angular lines
can become complex when
Complex
Angular
other lines join the two original ones. In
this case, the point receives not
two but, rather, several
pushes which (for simplicity's sake) are derived
from two, not several,
alternating forces. The schematic type of these lines
of many angles is composed of several segments of equal length which
stand at right angles to each other. Accordingly, the endless series of
many-angled lines becomes modified in two directions:
in a systematic work can kind
and in this of theoretic work be neglected which, naturally,
would not be possible in the case exclusively
of an "positivistic" approach. Even in these
"simple" cases, a one-sided approach can lead only one-sided
to conclusions. It would
be short-sighted to assume that a people is "accidentally" placed definite
in a geo-
graphic position which determines its further development. It would
also be quite as
insufficient to assert that the political and economic conditions which, in the final
analysis,
flow out of this people itself, guide and shape its creative power. The goal of
a creative power is an inner one
—this inner cannot be shelled out of the external alone.
1
See "On the Spiritual
in Art," p. 68.
77