external the inner.
combination with the elements—the road from the to
emphasized that the "floating sensations" The
It must nevertheless be strongly
Observer
above-mentioned conditions, but also upon the
depend not alone upon the
can be capable of seeing in one
inner attitude of the observer whose eye
ways: inadequately developed eye (which is
or the other, or in both if the
with spirit) cannot experience deeply, it will not
organically connected the
itself the material plane in order to perceive
be able to emancipate from
properly trained must have the ability
the indefinable space. The eye
work of art and partly to
partly to see the plane, as such, necessary to the
simple complex of lines can
disregard it when it takes on spatial form. A
finally be treated in two ways—either it has become one with the BP or it
lies free in space. The point clawing its way into the plane is also able to
1
free itself from the plane and to "float" in space.
Just as the inner tensions of the BP described above continue to exist in the
complex BP forms, these tensions are also transferred from the demateria-
lized plane to the indefinable space. The law does not lose its effect. If the
point of departure is correct and the direction taken is well chosen, the
goal cannot be missed.
And the goal of a theoretic investigation is
Goal of
1. to find the living, Theory
2. to make its pulsation perceptible, and
3. to determine wherein the living conforms
to law.
1
It is clear that the transformation of the material plane and the general character
of the elements combined with it are certain to have very important consequences in
many
respects. One of the most important of these is the change in the feeling for
time: space is identical with depth; also, with the elements receding into depth. It is
not without
reason that I have called the space resulting from dematerialization "inde-
finable" its
— depth is, after all, illusory and, therefore, not exactly measurable. Thus,
time cannot
in these cases be expressed in figures, and so it cooperates only relatively.
On
the other hand, the illusory depth is an actual one from the pictorial point of view
and consequently
a certain, even though immeasurable, time is required to follow the
form elements
receding into depth. Therefore: the transformation of the material BP
into indefinable
space offers the opportunity of increasing the span of time.
145