Inner At the beginning of this chapter, in the course of the discussion
of the
Concept
practical-useful value of the point in written language, the point was
defined as a concept linked with the idea of silence of shorter
or longer
duration.
The point, as such, makes a certain statement
which is organically bound
up with the utmost restraint.
The point is the innermost concise form.
It is turned inwards. It never completely
loses this characteristic—even
when it assumes, externally,
an angular shape.
Tension
Its tension is, even in its last analysis, concentric—also, in cases where it
exhibits eccentric tendencies, whereby arises a double resonance of the
concentric and the eccentric.
The point is a small world cut off more or less equally from all sides and
almost torn out of its surroundings. Its fusion with the surroundings
is
minimal,
and seems to be non-existent in cases of perfected roundness.
On the other hand, it maintains itself firmly in place and reveals not the
slightest tendency to movement in any direction whatsoever, either hori-
zontal or vertical. Furthermore, it neither advances nor recedes. Only its
concentric tension discloses its inner kinship with the circle—while its
Plane
1
characteristics rather point square.
further to the
plane and asserts itself for
Definition The point digs itself into the all time. Thus it
presents the briefest, constant, innermost assertion: short, fixed and
quickly created.
Therefore, the point, in its outer and inner sense, is the proto-element
2
of painting and especially of the "graphic."
^ colour form
For the relationship between and elements consult my article "Die
Grundelemente der Form" in "Staatl. Bauhaus I9I9-I923," Bauhaus-Verlag, Weimar-
Munich, 26 and colour plate V.
p.
2 There is a geometric designation of the point by means of an "O" meaning "origo,"
that is, "beginning" or "origin." The geometric and the pictorial views coincide.
The point, when looked upon as a symbol, is also termed the "proto-element." ("Das
32 Zeichenbuch" by Rudolph Koch, II Edition, Verlag W. Gerstung, Offenbach a. M., I926.)