—
role
is only a springboard to "tomorrow" and only in this
present day
accepted with innermost tranquility.
can it be
point to
No natural difference can or should remain superficial—it must
profound depth, that is, to the inner life of things. Likewise, technical
the
any
possibilities grow in just as functional and purposeful a manner as
tree, lion, star,
other potentiality, whether it be in "material" life (spruce
scientific method,
louse) or in the spiritual realm (art work, moral principle,
religious idea).
Even though on the surface the individual appearances of plants differ so
Root
greatly from each other that their inner relationship remains obscured
even though these phenomena seem chaotic to the superficial eye—they
can, nevertheless, on the basis of their common inner necessity, be
traced back root.
to the same
manner value differences which, although
It is in this that one learns the of False
Ways
well-founded, avenge themselves
they always are originally purposeful and
frightfully in monstrous abortions when they are handled in a frivolous
manner.
This simple fact can readily be observed in the more restricted field of the
graphics—the failure to understand the basic differences in the above-
mentioned technical potentialities has repeatedly lead to useless and,
therefore, repulsive works. They owe their existence to the inability of
recognizing the inner life behind the external appearance of things—the
soul, hardened like an empty nutshell, has its capacity to penetrate
lost
any longer the depths
of things where the pulsebeat, beneath the outer
husk, becomes audible.
The specialists of 19th Century graphics were not infrequently proud of
their ability to make a woodcut resemble a pen drawing, or a lithograph
look like an etching. Works of this sort can be designated only as testi-
monials of spiritual poverty. The cock's crowing, the door's creaking, the
dog's barking, however cleverly imitated on a violin, can never be esti-
mated as artistic accomplishments. 47