This abstract adherence to law peculiar to one of the arts, finds in this Other Arts
application, which be compared
art a constant, more or less conscious can
and which in both cases—art and nature
with nature's adherence to law
being very particular satisfaction. Funda-
—affords the inner human a
abstract, law-abiding quality is most certainly
mentally, this same the
expressions. The spatial elements in sculpture and
property of other art
1
tonal elements in music, the elements of movement in
architecture, the
2
word elements in poetry, all have need of a similar
the dance, and the
and similar elementary comparison with respect to their
uncovering a
external and their inner characteristics, which I call "sounds."
tables set up in the sense proposed here must be subjected to an
The
examination, and it is easily possible that these individual tables,
exact
final analysis, will result in one synthetic table.
in the
Emotional assertion surely is originally rooted in intuitive experiences
compels our taking the first steps along this inviting road. The emo-
and
tional alone, however, in this case could easily lead off the track; this can
only avoided with the help of exact analytic work. By the use of the
be
3
right method, is possible, however, avoid pitfalls.
it to
The progress won through systematic work will create an elementary dic- Dictionary
tionary which, in its further development, will lead to a "grammar" and,
finally, to a theory of composition which will pass beyond the boundaries
of the individual art expressions and become applicable to "Art" as a
4
whole.
1 The identity of the basic elements sculpture
in and architecture explains in part the
victorious subjugation of sculpture
by architecture today.
2 The nomenclature used here for the basic elements various looked
of the arts must be
upon as provisional. Even the commonly-held concepts hazy.
are
3
This is a clear example of the necessary simultaneous use of intuition and calculation.
4
See clear suggestions of this in "On the Spiritual in Art" and in my article "Ober
Biihnenkomposition" in "Der Blaue Reiter," Piper Verlag, Munich, I9I2.
83