with nature" as the essence of his work, but he could also say that "all
what goes unnoticed by the multitude. He is an interpreter of signs.
true creation is a thing born out of nothing." The seeming contrast is
When Walter Gropius developed the curriculum of his German Bauhaus,
resolved through his unfailing originality "born out of nothing" which
he gave back to the word teacher its basic significance. Kandinsky, Klee,
is the spiritual cause. The optical effect is a pictorial composition that
Feininger, Moholy-Nagy, Schlemmer, Albers, who taught there, were
uses the identifiable natural shape as mediary. In THE ROOM AND ITS
interpreters of the visual as tokens of a fundamental optical and struc
INHABITANTS from 1921, floor boards, window frame and door, are
tural order that had been obscured by centuries of literary allegorism.
recognizable, together with the faces of woman and child. But they are
In this community of guides Paul Klee chose for himself the task of
mere points of reference in a world of lines, arrows, reflections, fade
pointing out new ways of studying the signs of nature. "By contem
outs that reveal intuitively the mysterious man-shelter relationship
plating the optical-physical appearance, the ego arrives at intuitive con
that has determined the course of civilization.
clusions about the inner substance." The art student was to be more
If ever an artist understood the visual aspirations of his epoch it was
than a refined camera, trained to record the surface of the object. He
Paul Klee; and the civilized world came to recognize his contemporane
must realize that he is "child of this earth; yet also child of the Universe;
ousness even before his death in 1940. Exhibitions and publications
issue of a star among stars."
have constantly increased in number; and it might be assumed that,
A mind so in flux, so sensitive to intuitive insights, could never write an
together with Cezanne and Picasso, he will be the most reproduced and
academic textbook. All he could retain on paper were indications, hints,
annotated painter of this century. But it is known to few that Paul Klee
allusions, like the delicate color dots and line plays on his pictures. The
was more than a painter. His "communication with nature" produced
PEDAGOGICAL SKETCHBOOK is the abstract of Paul Klee's inductive
much more than the transfiguration of the perceived form. It produced
vision. In it the natural object is not merely rendered two-dimensionally,
a philosophy that rested on empathy with the created world, accepting
it becomes "räumlich," related to physical and intellectual space con
everything that is with equal love and humility. As a very young man
cepts, through four main approaches that form the four divisions of
he had spoken of his art as "andacht zum kleinen" (devotion to small
the Sketchbook:
things). In the Microcosm of his own visual world he worshipped the
Proportionate Line and Structure
Macrocosm of the universe. This was his revolution. Academic art had
Dimension and Balance
been based since the Renaissance on the Aristotelian principle of de
Gravitational Curve
duction, meaning that all representation was deduced from the broad
Kinetic and Chromatic Energy
general principles of absolute beauty and conventional color canons.
Paul Klee replaced deduction by induction. Through observation of the
The first part of the Sketchbook (Sections 1.1-1.13) introduces the trans
smallest manifestation of form and interrelationship, he could conclude
formation of the static dot into linear dynamics. The line, being succes
about the magnitude of natural order. Energy and substance, that which
sive dot progression, walks, circumscribes, creates passive-blank and
moves and that which is moved, were of equal importance as symbols
active-filled planes. Line rhythm is measured like a musical score or an
of creation. He loved the natural event; therefore he knew its meaning
arithmetical problem. Gradually, line emerges as the measure of all
in the universal scheme. And with the instinct of the true lover he
structural proportion, from Euclid's Golden Section (1.7) to the energetic
had to comprehend what he loved. The phenomenon perceived and
power lines of ligaments and tendons, of water currents and plant
analyzed, was investigated until its significance was beyond doubt. It
fibers. Each of the four divisions of the Sketchbook has one key-sen
is in Paul Klee that science and art fuse. Exactitude winged by intuition
tence, strewn almost casually-without the pompousness of a theorem
was the goal he held out for his students.
among specific observations. This one sentence in each chapter points
Paul Klee the painter could not help becoming a teacher in the original
the path from the particular to the universal. The first part on "Propor
meaning of the term. The word "to teach" derives from the Gothic
tionate Line and Structure" is condensed into one laconic statement:
"taiku-sign" (our word token). It is the mission of the teacher to observe
5
9