joined in a continuous line. Around that time the streamline automobile also 
170 
gradually took shape. A special bodywork (1932), which soon became popular, 
marked the beginning of the trend. At first one spoke not of streamline design 
but simply of redesign, whether of washing machines or of small mechanical 
parts. Serious attempts were made to improve the product in itself; thus we 
hear instances of pressed metal parts becoming 30 per cent cheaper to make, 
37 per cent lighter, and at the same time improved in strength and performance.m 
This was culled 'product engineering,' which phrase a trade journal, published 
in New York from 1930 on, adopted for its title long before 'Appearance Counts' 
2 
hecame the motto.l7
It was explicitly stressed that 'appearance does count' -for reasons of sales­
manship-~' even in machinery that seldom appears in show-windows or in 
modern kitchens.' 
There was soon considerahle activity in redesigning with streamline form 
various elements of the mechanized household, the range, the kitchen, the refrig­
erator, and the washing machine. These should he transformed 'from a house­
hold machine to a piece of home equipment.' m Machinery gained iu compact­
ness in this time of full mechanization. The washing machines of 1914 left 
their loosely gathered components visihle. The motor seemed isolated, the 
dangerous moving parts often lay exposed. Now the industrial designer takes 
over. He shapes the casing, sees to it that the visible mechanism disappears 
from sight, in short, streamlines its appearance. Like the train and the auto­
mobile, and at the same time, household appliances underwent redesign.m 
This sometimes led to the invention of new types, such as the tahle-top range, 
which compactly unites concentrated heat sources, working surfaces, and 
storage space with huilt-in appliances. It 11lso favored the kitchen. These 
streamlined kitchens are so named because they were designed as integrated 
units around the work process. The styling of refrigerators began in 1933. 
Products thus catch the eye more readily in the department store. 'It was 
also reasoned that women can be sold much more easily on appearance than on 
175 
mechanical superiority.' 
170 
W. D. Teague, Design Thi..'i Day, The Technique of Ordu in the Machine Age, New York, 194·0, p.31. 
Earlier automobiles (such as the 1924 Voisin model) were based on another principle: compactness. 
m Product Engineering, vol. l, New York, 1930, p.230. 
172 
Ibid. p.2M. 
173 
T. J. Maloney, 'Case Histories in Product Design,' Product Engineering (1934), vol. 5, p.219. 
m For specific examples, see ibid. 
175 
George F. Tauheneck, 'The Development of the American Household Electric Refrigeration Indus-­
try,' in Proceedings of the Vlllh International Congress of Refrigeration, 1936. 
608 