will be based is not exceptional at this period. In the mechanization of the 
household we can sec how, at the outset, some devices- from so modest a 
utensil as the rotary egg beater (1856) to the vacuum cleaner (1859), the dish­
washing machine (1365), the washing machine with gyrator (1869) -were 
straightwa~ laid down in the principles that were tD guide their future 
development. 
It was Pulhnan's rival of his early days, Theodore T. Woodruff (1811-92), 
79 
who worked out the decisive solution for the folding bed in the sleeping car 
(flg. 235). His was true inventor's blood. From the standpoint of 1850 he 
belonged to the modern type of wagon builder. To make a bed disappear into 
the ceiling by hauling on ropes was too awkward for him. To him furniture 
meant a series of mobile planes to be combined in various ways. It is a pleasure 
to observe how skilfully he uses hinges for his purposes, swinging up the back 
rest of his seat through 90 degrees to a horizontal position, so ohtaining two 
middle berths. The seat bottom folds down to a lower position, where a hori­
zontal plane is waiting to join with it; this gives him two more berths near floor 
level. Decisive is the idea of hinging the upper hed above the window. By day 
it forms a connecting surface between the ceiling and the wall of the car. Wood­
ruff phrases it in simple words: • Hinged ... frames are arranged in such a manner 
that they can be converted into a couch above the car windows.' Woodruff 
conceived the folding bed with its hinges as others before him had conceived 
the folding chair. This was new. 
Nevertheless, Woodruff's patents still did not speak of the sleeping ear hut 
only of a 'car se":rt and couch.' The space available for each person was indeed 
limited. One realizes that Woodruff could accommodate flvc people in this 
80 
manner, four in the two lower berths and one in the lDpmos\. Today one 
recognizes the guiding role played by Woodruff's proposal to fold the upper 
berth between the wall and the ceiling. 
It presented for the first time the idea of a folding upper berth, it was a radical depar­
ture from the arrangements in use before. . . . ·while the invention of the sleeping-car 
is commonly associated with other names, the credit for the original idea and for priority 
of patent, and for having constructed under his patents the first practical sleeping-car, 
81 
belongs to Theodore T. '\Voodruff.
79 
U.S. Patents 16,159 and 16,160, 2 Dec. 1856. Today's solution is embodied in the second of these. 
80 
In subsequent patents, ':Voodruff retained the idea of the folding bed- cf. lJ.S. Patent 24·,257, 
31 May 1859. He even complicated it into a double~fo1ding 'elevated couch' fOl' two sleepers. 
81 
Charles S. Sweet, 'Sketch of the E-volution of the Pullman Car' (192:{), in manuscript, p.ll6. 
Through the cou.rte~y of the Pullman Company, Chicago, we had access to this manuscript, the most 
objective and solidly documented record of the subject. It considers the sleeping-car bed but not. dw 
convertible seat. It is espeeially concerned with all technical details of the Pullman car: brakes, wheels, 
heating, water, lighting, and so on. 
461 