the sixteenth century, the secretary, the credenza, the chair, and !he cupboard 
all grew into parts of the secnlar interior. 
The English of the late eighteenth century gave careful attention to the dresser 
without shelves, the sideboard, and brought it to its present-day form. 'Side­
board' meant a table (hoard) standing against the wall (side), either on legs or 
leaning against the wall. The Oxford English Dictionary quotes such usage from 
the fourteenth century on down to Alexander Pope. The sideboard, which 
Sheraton and his time equipped with refined compartments, is of the credenza 
type, in which this shelfless form first appeared. 
Another type of buffet, rooted in the late Gothic tradition, took shape beyond 
the Alps in the sixteenth century, especially in southern Germany and Switzer­
land. This was not independent furniture like the credenza, but, as we have 
noticed, an integral of the wainscoting; its body and superstructure form an 
11nohtrusively advancing section of the wall. It can still be found in this form 
in inns and peasant honses of Switzerland today. 
This was the type that nineteenth-century ruling taste molded to its wishes, 
the buffet as an ornate monster which even invaded the not too large 
isolating 
middle-class dining room. It was thus revived not in Germany in the 'eighties, 
but in France during the 'sixties. 
THE COMMODE 
The commode is a direct descendant of the chest. Yet, it was a latecomer to 
the house. It does not appear in Italy before the wane of the sixteenth century,' 
9 
and in England it is first mentioned at about the same time.' Its initial form 
consisted of three drawers, each of which, rnnning the full width of the piece, 
was accentuated hy heavily carved horizontal members. Abo>e these was fitted 
a row of smaller drawers. 
The size of its drawers is no doubt the reason for the late appearance of the 
commode. Small drawers present no great technical diffieulty, but large ones 
are in every respect harder to handle. In addition to taxing the craftsman's 
skill, movable receptacles of unwonted size had tradition to overcome. If we 
take an early starting point, the archive almaiar of 1<!55 (fig. 149), a century 
and a Ilalf elapse before drawer-furniture reaches maturity. 
Only with the Rococo did it enter into its brilliance. Havard thus seems jus-
7 
Ibid. vol. l, p.306: 'The only Renaissance example we have dates from the last decade of the XVI 
century.' In the Victoria and Albert Museum, Routh Kensinf[ton, London. 
8 
The Oxford English Dictionary reports, in the year 1599, mention of 'A great chest or standard with 
drawing chests or boxes in it.' Nothing, however. is said of its appearance. 
9 Odom, op.cit. vol. I, fig. 250. 
307 