443. Steam Room (Maghtus) of an Islamic Bath. 
Hammam of Kalaour, Cairo. Tlw Islamic bather pre~ 
fers quiescence, seclW:lion, and the dim light thai is here 
obtained by means of honeycomb vaults. (E. Pauly, 
Les Hammams du Caire, Cairo, 1933) 
6 
Near Alexandria in the Nile delta, the archaeologist Breccia uncovered the 
remains of a hath- two circular buildings, which he assumed to have heen 
heated to different temperatures. These circular halls appear in the Roman 
thermae as the Laconicum, the hottest of their rooms. We should not he sur­
prised if the archaeologist were ultimately justified in his ascription of these 
haths to Ptolemaic times.' Alexandria of the third century B.C. was the direct 
heir of the Greek spirit, with its stress on technical invention. Here Euclid 
taught. In this focus, astronomy, experimental physics, surgery, aud gyne­
cology met- an atmosphere favorable to the rise of thermae. In what state 
of perfectedness the Romans found the Hellenistic thermae seems still an unan­
swered question. 
Only with the Roman Empire did the thermae take on a sovereign signifi­
cance, such as they attained neither hefore nor later. Their thermae hecame 
the monuments of a nation that controlled the material wealth of the world. 
Within their walls, the hest in Roman technical, architectural, and sociological 
thought was united. 
What the Roman engineering talent so thoroughly exploited for human regen­
eration was a scheme of appealing simplicity: this floor aud wall-heating system, 
which Vitruvius has described in detail, is taken to have emerged in the 
first century B.C. The floor stood on low hrick pillars (hypocausls) beneath 
which the fire gases passed. A system of square earthenware pipes (tubulae) 
G E. Breecia, 'Di A.lcuni bagni nei dinterni d'.:\Jessandria,' Rnll.etin. de la &x:ietk A.rchkologique d' Alexan­
drie, no. 18, Nouvelle Serie, vot v, premier fascicnle, pp.l42-·9. 
7 
There is also palpable evidence that public baths were the common practice in Egypt of the third 
ooo.tury B.C. Cf. A. Calderini, 'Bagni pubblici nell'Egitto greco~romano,' Rendiconli del Reale In.stiluto 
Lcmbardo di Scienze e Lettere, vol. 52 (1919), fasc. 9-ll, pp.297-331. 
631 