same process iJ; seen in Europe as soon as countries with a high standard of living 
find that the cheapness of world wheat makes the growing of domestic wheat 
unprofitable. 
The structural transformation of the farmer from self-sufficiency to specializa­
tion occurs in all lands, wherever industrialization runs its course; but in America 
this process can be observed as clearly as in a laboratory. Here mechaniza­
tion could deploy untrammeled by dimensions, terrain and social structure. 
In Europe today the farmer can stand on his own legs as a home producer 
and consumer only in countries where the standard of living is low. In countries 
such as Switzerland, where the living standard comes closer to the American, 
the farmer must be shielded by subsidies of all kinds. To appearances nothing 
has changed. The old stock remains in possession of the same holdings which, 
as Emerson claimed for the New England farms in 1858, may oot have changed 
hands for centuries. The meadows are as carefully kept as the honses, each of 
which seems to have a physiognomy of its own. But economically the existence 
of the farmer is in danger, for his products cannot compete in the world market. 
His survival on the old basil; iJ; felt as a social imperative. The legllilature pro­
vides for him and protects him. In America the authors of the laws served the 
interest of businessmen, bankers, railroads; legislation for the farmer's benefit 
(Homestead Act, 1862) was later interpreted in favor of the trusts and railroad 
companies.' 
Specialization goes on without respite. If he lli to reruain in competition, the 
farmer must increasingly narrow his produce to a specific type of corn, tomato, 
cattle, or poultry. Even within the product itself he is forced into stricter and 
stricter standardization. The commercial fruit farms grow tens of thousands of 
fruit trees of a kind. This is the result of more systematic cultivation of the 
trees: careful guarding from parasites, better exposure to sunlight, the pruning 
away of superfluous branches, the discarding of useless blossoms. The climate 
too plays its part. By the middle of the last century, North America bad earned 
the title 'a grand laboratory of nature for the production of new ameliorated 
4 
fruit.' 
The influence of mechanization- or more accurately, here, of mass production 
-leads to standardization of the fruit into few varieties. A million peach trees, 
it iJ; claimed, grow on one commercial farm. We have seen an orchard of 42,000 
s Allan Nevins and HenryS. Commager, The Pocket lli.slory of the United Stales, pp.372-3. 'Men who 
wrote the national laws were much more zealous to serve the interests of manufacturers, hankers and 
rru1road men than to take care of the farmers and legislation reflected this zeal. . . . Laws designed to 
regulate trusts and railroads were so written or interpreted that they caused little inconvenience.' 
4 The Rural Cyclopedia, Edinburgh, 1854, vol. I. p.222. 
I32 