placed in its frame. Cleanliness of the body could hardly have been its purpose. 
It forms tbe background tor a scene between a gallant, a young woman, and a 
procuress. Bath and sin were one. 
The stunting of the sense for cleanliness and, in the broader sense, for regen­
eration in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries is so far as we know a phe­
nomenon wilhout parallel in any olber highly civilized period. In many ways 
we are still suffering the effects today. When such an altitude has eaten its 
way into society it easily becomes an ahnost unshakable prejudice, a part of 
life that resists renwval even when its causes have withered away. 
The seventeenth century, which laid the spiritual foundations for tbe follow­
ing period, carried neglect of the body to its lowest state. Slowly, the eighteenth 
century began the change. A start was made along two directions: through 
medicine, and through the rediscovery of nature; that is, hy therapeutics and 
by a new orientation of feeling. The two will become intertwined in the course 
of the nineteenth century . 
. Medicine Paves 'the Way 
The English dortor, John F1oyer (1649-1734), tells us that 'baptismal immer­
35 
sion continued till the beginning of the last [seventeenth] century ' and con­
nects its decline to the decay of bathing. John Floyer, said to have been the 
first to measure the pulse-beat, won considerable fame for his use of cold baths 
in disease, particularly in the cure of riekets. He strongly defended the re­
introduction and the therapeutic effect of the cold bath. Floyer lists other factors 
that helped to inhibit the bathing tradition in his century. One of these was 
the rise of 'chyrnieal doctors,' who introduced new medicines and imputed all 
diseases to crudity and acid salts. Finally he imputes a share of the blame to 
the newly imported narcotics and spices. 'I shall add one more reason of the 
disuse of cold baths, which was the increase of foreign trade last century, which 
then introduced all the hot regimen from tl1e hot climates such as tobacco, coffee, 
tea, wine, brandy, spirits and spices, and these are unnatural to English bodies. 
Soon in Germany too, around 1730, voices were heard defending the bath, 
tbe shower, and their beneficence. Bocrhaave, a great Dutch physician of the 
eighteenth century, attributed so important a role to water in the cure of mal­
adies that he later became the patron of hydropathy. Around mid-eighteenth 
century in England, attention turned to the curative virtues of sea bathing. 
But all these are exceptions and did not run within the broad stream of custom. 
Use of the bath for any bnl medical purposes was regarded as unsound, and 
""John Floyer, Psychrolusia, or the History of Cold Bathing, Both Ancient and Modern, 5th ed., London, 
1722. Cf. Dedication. Originally published with the title: Enquiry info the Right Use of Baths, London, 1697. 
654 