sociological ground. The explanation lies in the divergent political attitudes 
that prevailed in Europe and in America in the 'thirties, when railroads came 
into being. 
Distance was not the decisive factor. As early as 1836, six years after the 
opening of the first American passenger and freight line, a thirteen-mile stretch 
between Baltimore and Ellicott, a rudimentary sleeping car was rigged np for 
a night journey of a few hours on the Cumberland Valley Railroad, today a 
section of the Pennsylvania. A passenger coach was divided into compartments, 
49 
each containing three simple hunks, one above the other . It was not, as one 
might think, competition that decisively stimulated this development. Rather, 
it was the attitude toward comfort that so sharply differentiated the American 
from the European trends. 
The way each country met the question of comfort and of segregation into 
classes around 1330 mirrors the attitude of the ruling groups to the people as 
a whole. Over France and Germany at this period, the Restoration reigned, 
giving absolute privilege to its ruling classes. The railroad cars were built on 
the principle that the masses deserved little consideration. More than 80 per 
cent of those who traveled sat huddled together on rough wooden seats, and 
countries with four classes also used cattle cars for passengers. Only the upper 
strata of society cordd afford any degree of comfort. 
In these things, the birthmarks often linger on long after their original causes 
have vanished. On the Continent to this day the 'wooden' class has survived. 
True, tile space allotted to the individual has tripled since the 'forties, the wooden 
benches have been somewhat fitted to the shape of the body -but they remain 
stiff and immovable, as at the outset. 
America had one travel class only (except for Negroes and later for immi­
grants). European observers between 1830 and 1860 are constantly surprised 
that the United States had not two, three, or four passenger classes, hut only 
one. Although it had certainly no superfluous window space and was simple 
and even primitive, the American coach of the 'forties revealed a regard for 
human dignity and, in the upholstered benches, a rudimentary attempt at 
comfort (fig. 271). For all its simplicity it retlected the democratic ways of the 
time, for everyone knew: 'No other shall have any better than I.' And this 
democratic conception lived on into the mid 'sixties, until Prdhuan became one 
of the first to arouse an inclination for luxury in the American public. The 
notion endures, even today, that every person who travels is entitled to a mini­
mum of comfort. This standard - a coach class with fully adjustable seats-"­
no other country has rivaled. 
49 
Pullman News, Chicago, October 1940, p.43. 
440 