grow out of real vases. Dreams lose their fascination when frozen into natural­
istic terms. And it is also significant for the devaluation of symbols that the 
Empire architects enthrone a god on an ahnost ceiling-high pylon in the midst 
of a room, and call it a wardrobe." 
FURNITURE BECOMES DOMINANT 
The decisive step toward the nineteenth century in Empire style was the 
beginning of spatial disintegration. 
Furniture is trPA!ted in the spirit of self-sufficient architecture. Pieces are 
often conceived as isolated entities, and furniture loses its relatedness to the 
surrounding space. 
When the eighteenth century designed pieces of any considerable size, it set 
them as far as possible flush to the wall, sometimes between rooms, so that 
their volumes should remain as inconspicuous as possible (fig. 192). 
The cabinetmakers of late eighteenth-century England expended great pains 
on the glass-fronted bookcase. They were especially anxious to keep the piece 
modest in appearance, of such proportions as to hold as many books as possible 
in the least space. They set the mntainer close to the wall. In 1800 Percier 
and Fontaine designed a similarly modest bookcase for Napoleon's residence 
in Mahnaison. But, at the same time, they are tempted to make the bookca'e 
into a display piece (fig. 191), such as the 'secretary used as a bookcase' designed 
for an Amsterdam client. In its parts, it takes after the English bookcases. But 
the meaning has changed. Access to books is no longer the guiding motive. 
More urgent, it seems, is that the furniture should he shaped like an Egyptian 
temple door, and covered with hieroglyphs. Percier and Fontaine comment, 
'The Egyptian form adopted hy us had been requested to set forth a series of 
various rare woods and to afl'ord the motives for various incrustations. The 
11 
two sitting figures with Osiris heads are in bronze.' Exotic appeal and decora­
tiveness arc here the yardstick. 
Space cannot hold its own against the gigantic flower stands flanked by four 
plant-bearing sphinxes, where three tiers accommodate a goldfish bowl, flowers, 
and a birdcage. By 1800 this stand, commissioned by a Swedish Count, has 
anticipated whatever the nineteenth century will contrive in this way (fig. 193). 
THE INFLUENCE OF THE UPHOLSTERER 
And finally the trend of Empire style appears in an adjtmct that is far from 
the genius of serious design and which seems purely accessory at first glance: 
This is the great role played by drapery. It reaches its peak toward the end of 
1
~ Percier and Fontaine, Recueil de decorations interieures, Paris, 1801. 
n Ibid. 
342 