MECHANIZATION AND DEATH: MEAT 
Centralization and Handicraft 
Paris, the Slaughterhouse of La Villette (1863~7) 
THE Prefect of the Seine Department, George Eugene Haussmann, so wielded 
his almost dictatorial powers that in the space of seventeen years he changed 
the whole aspect of Paris and recast its technical organization from top to bottom. 
Mter the steps initiated by Napoleon I, the city had failed to keep pace with 
the times; Haussmann transformed Paris into a nineteenth-century metropolis.' 
He was the frrst to perrAJive the city primarily as a problem in engineering and 
organization. ln keeping with his foresight and his preference for the large 
scale, he did not hesitate to provide, in his master plan, for a central slaughter­
house demanding an outlay of 23 million francs. And this he accomplished 
while his downfall was being openly contrived at every step. He began the 
building in 1863, opening it 1 January 1867, the year of the lavish International 
Exposition; yet the installation was not complete when the Second Empire 
collapsed. 
The Central Slaughterhouse of La Villette (fig. 107) was erected on the outer­
most limit of the fortified belt. One side was bordered by manifold railway 
sidings, another by the harbor-like expanse of the Canal St. Denis, one arm of 
which flowed through the plant, whose buildings rose on either bank. On the 
two other sides, the Slaughterhouse was hounded by a broad military road and 
a lesser thoroughfare. 
lt was the frrst central slaughterhouse to cater to a poprdation of millions. 
lts lairages, as Hanssmann pointed out, cordd accommodate 'the number of 
2 
beasts needed for Parisian consumption over a period of several days.' ln 
England and in Germany, vested interests stood in the way of any development 
such as conceived by Haussmann. Nowhere did anything comparable exist 
at the time. ln his Memoires, Hanssmann gives his enterprise the prominence 
it deserves: 'The vast establishment is one of the most considerable works 
accomplished by my administration, paralleling the great sewer constructions. 
. . . l should not forget to mention that the millions it cost were in very large 
measure balanced by the sale ... of the better situated lots of the old abattoirs 
3 
that it replaced.' 
The 'old abattoirs' to which Hanssmann refers in his Memo ires were the 
work of Napoleon l and; represented the first endeavor to organize a slanghter-
1 For the details of this development, cf. Giedion, op.cit. pp.465-501. 
1 George Eugene Haussmann, Mbnoires, Paris, 1890-93, vol. m, p.561. 
• Ibid. pp.560 and 561. 
209 