America, for reasons that are not difficult to understand, was a fertile ground 
for the standardization and interchangeability of parts. But it is still a matter 
of small dimensions even in mid-century, when clocks assembled from inter足
changeable parts were manufactured hy the Waltham factory. Skilled work足
manship was needed for clock repair and tbe interchanging of clock parts. 
Proposals for the interchangeability of larger parts were advanced in various 
spheres at the beginning of the 'fifties. The idea of saws with interchangeable 
teeth (fig. 24) arose in a California sawmill extremely remote from any factory 
where damaged teeth could have been repaired. The inventor subsequently 
returned to the Atlantic States, where he put his idea into practice.' A circular 
saw of this type, 30 inches in diameter, was exhibited at the Paris International 
Exhibition of 1367. 
This whole field will not he gone into further here, for mainly technical pro足
cedures are involved. Besides, to investigate it with the necessary precision 
demands interrelated research, which will doubtless be accomplished only when 
American industry has overcome its historical bashfulness. 
Only one point need be touched upon here: Interchangeability becomes an 
interesting question as soon as it is applied to larger machines, and when inter足
change can he performed independently of skilled labor. One of the very rare 
catalogues from the 'sixties, the Circular for the Year 1367 of the most elegant 
constructor of agricultural machinery, Walter A. Wood, Hoosick Falls, N.Y.,' 
publishes six 'diagrams of parts' (fig. 25) for his mower and Handrake Reaper, 
each part heing illustrated and numbered, so that the farmer need ouly write 
for the necessary part by number. From the first, the mechanically minded 
farmer was accustomed to assemble the machines himself. McCormick, for 
instance, sent out his reaper in four numbered crates. 
So far as we can yet ascertain, Walter A. Wood, whose name we shall again 
encounter, was the first to institute the interchanging without technical help 
of parts for large machines. This catalogue of 1367 gives more space to the 
representation of interchangeable parts than to the machines themselves. This 
was half a century hefore Heury Ford in the automobile industry familiarized 
the broader public with the same principle. 
As we soon shall see, the advent of interchangeable parts for the larger machines 
and the eliraination of skilled labor fall within the same period as the beginnings 
of the modern assembly line in the meat packing industry. 
~American Manufadurer and Builder, New York, Jan. 1869. 
liThe Walter A. Wood Mowing and Reaping Machine Company, Hoosick. Falls, New York, Circular 
for the Year 1867, Albany, 1867. 
50 