FROZEN FOODS 
The time of full mechanization brings yet another penetration of organic sub­
stance: we recognize that it is one thing to keep an organic substance lingering 
in the neighborhood of freezing point and another to freeze it swiftly by nse of 
low temperatures. A slow descent to freezing point - 32° Fabreubeit- bursts 
the cells of plants and animals. In quick freezing these cells remain intact and 
hold their flavor like wine corked in bottles. 
While wintering in Labrador, Clarence Birdseye, as is well known, observed 
that the flesh of fish and reindeer congealed rapidly in the Arctic air. When 
the Eskimos returned months later, it was as fresh as the day when kiUed. Birds­
eye translated this into mechanical terms by bringing food to freezing point 
between metal plates. Soon after this process was patented in 1925, its com­
mercial application began. In 1928 the first foodstuffs processed by this method 
reached the market. Their consumption grew hy leaps- from 39 million pound­
63 
cartons in 1934 to 600 million in 1944.1
The sculptor Brancusi heard the dictum in the far East that frnit should not 
be eaten over thirty miles from the place where it grew. Quick freezing will 
perhaps help to supersede this wisdom, for it enables fruit to be plucked when 
fully ripe. 'Quick freezing starts at the moment of maximum palatability.' 
Similarly with sea food. The catch is frozen as soon as it is lifted aboard the 
trawlers. Not even the entrails need he removed. In New York we have eaten 
crab from the Pacific Ocean tasting as if it had just been taken from the sea -
far fresher, certainly, than when it has passed through the local markets in the 
traditional way, or has heen extracted from the can. 
The economic necessity of shipping livestock from the Great Plains to the 
Cllicago or Kansas City slaughterhouses can in principle he dispensed with. 
Cattle can be processed on the farm. 
What implications are in store? 
The economic advantages are evident. Quick freezing affords protection 
against waste. 'Through refrigeration the farmer can preserve his entire crop 
and can now obtain full realization of his investment.'" 
Even more important seem to us the latent social potentialities. Quick freez­
ing may be a way to attain better equilibrium in the matter of mass production 
and monopoly. Rightly used, it should help decentralization. It gives the small 
farmer a new chance to have his produce compete with the giant farms. He 
may install a freezer on the farm, as described in Boyden Sparks's small book, 
based on the first ventures in this direction, Zero Storage in Your Home (New 
W3 George F. Tauheneck, Great Day Coming!, Detroit, 1944, p.l85. 
164 
Ibid. 
604 