Surely it is no accident that in Klee's work firsl appeared the direction-poinLing 
arrow as a rectangle headed by a triangle, a form that gained international cur­
rency. In his Pedagogical Sketchbook Klee explains in his way, which is at the same 
time symbolic and ilirect, the coming about of this form (fig. 53). Kandinsky's 
canvas 'Pink Square' (1923) (fig. 20) is a cosmic storm, a coomogony of shooting 
lines, of arrows, of planetary rings, and the figure '3' expanded in sickle form. 
Drawings and lithographs, Paul Klee's favorite expression around 1920, otTer 
the natural medium for rapidly executed and continuous motion. Very soon his 
motion symbols extend into the organic. A bold step it was in 1921 to form the 
image of man out of the symbols of movement, as if to portray him by the things 
he does and thinks. 
A third stage announces itself, a development of which we know only the 
beginning: the form of moven1ent becomes a means of expression in painting 
just as perspeclive had formerly been the means of expressing a specific content, 
an isolated scene. \Vhen motion rather than perspective is chosen as .the m.f'Alns 
of expression, it yields instead of a static picture a dynamic oue. The titles that 
Klee gives his pictures- 'Lady in the Soulh,' 'Spinster,' 'Anchored,' 'Park 
with Birds,' 'Temple Reflected in Water,' 'Aging Couple'-might be titles of 
the static genre pictures of the ruling taste. 
Here the same title stands for something quite different. Just as Gilbreth 
made visible the form and the true meaning of bodily movement, so Klee was 
able to give visible form to the innermost processes of the psyche. This perspec­
tive cannot do. The search now is for relations that are manifold, fluctuating, 
and far from static. 
The whole picture becomes motion process. 
Let us take a picture of Klee's late period-' Aging Couple' (fig. 61) for 
instance. In truth it hardly needs a title. It lives in its motion-form with a life 
of its own. As in a geod Renaissance painting, its power stems not so much 
from its content as from distinguished handling of the means of expression. An 
eye not yet accustomed to the pictorial language based on motion process will at 
first see no more than this, and perhaps the striking interaction of the colors 
-brilliant yellow, hrown, pink-violet, and green. Whoever has learned the 
pictorial language based on symbols will see portrayed all that is masklike, 
antagonistic, and evil in this 'Aging Couple' and how, in a single circuit, the 
movement embraces and binds the two faces. Without Picasso's pitiless surgical 
intervention and without his pathos, anatomy is made submissive to expression 
and movement. This is the year of' Guernica.' 
In less than two decades, art learned to use motion fo= to represent psychic 
processes with lapidary cast and dynamic color. This may be the beginning of 
112 