steel wheels, it received balloon tires (1932), so that no time need he lost in 
field-to-field transit. 
Decisive in the tractor is its concentration of power in a light nnit. It works 
not only faster hut with greater output than the three horses harnessed to a 
reaper. It can haul more machines than they, and serve a greater variety of 
them. 
Combined Processes 
We are in tbe time when the assembly line or production line extends into 
every sphere. Even if nature refnses to merge beginning and end in one swift 
process, and needs time to grow and ripen, ways and means are nevertheless 
found to integrate the beginning-~ plowing-sowing-fertilizing- and the end 
- reaping to bagging- into line production. 
The grain lies on the ground. For drying, the sheaves must he set up hy hand. 
Further time is lost in transporting the grain. The combined harvester-thresher, 
known simply as a 'combine,' gathers these operations into a single one (fig. 90). 
In 1936 ~-at this time fast tractors on tires came to the fore- there was huilt 
a combine suited to the needs of the family-type farm. It cuts the grain like 
the reaper, in the cnstomary five or six foot swathe. Under favorable circum­
69 
stances, it is said to travel four to five miles an hour, reaping, threshing, and 
70 
pouring the wheat into sacks. This combination is known as the 'baby combine.' 
The idea of harvesting in a single operation is of early date. It was one of the 
temporarily shelved inventions. The first patent for combined processes was 
taken out in 1828 --before McCormick had built his earliest reaper --hut 
nothing is known of it heyond the specification. The first 'machine for harvest­
71 
ing, threshing, cleaning and bagging grain' was built in 1836 (fig. 89), so that 
a hundred-year waiting period intervenes between the creation of the type and 
its introduction upon the one-family farm. The reasons are easy to understand. 
Not only did the machines drawn by a team of twelve oxen cost several thou­
sand dollars; they called for an equable climate and well-organized commercial 
farms. These were lacking in the Midwest. In keeping with the spirit of the 
prairie, this 'combine' of 1836 was built by two prairie farmers and sprang np 
directly in the wilderness. 
6
9 Ibid. p.l4. 
70 
New agricultural machines did not have to he invented for these, only 'new combinations.' The 
internal-combustion motor made it possible to combine existing mechanisms into a production line on 
wheels. The 'baby combine' followed in 1939. It was followed in turn by a further reduction in scale, 
the 'midget combine,' cutting swathes of 1.0 inches. 
n By H. Moore and J. Haskell, U.S. Patent, 28 June 1836. Thoroughly described in Ardrey, op.cit. 
pp.54-5. It had a reaping mechanism, an endless belt which ('.arried the grain to the thresher, a winnowing 
mechanism, fan, and sack~filliug apparatus. 
163 