stimulating the skin, a handful of leaves and onions for massage, are ahnost all 
that was needed. It was never raised into a sumptuous succession of halls at 
staggered temperatures. A few tiers of benches, at various distances from the 
ceiling where the heat is greatest, provided for this. In winter, the outside 
atmosphere and rolling in the snow supplied the necessary contrast; in summer 
the near-by river, or a dousing of cold water. This type is a nature bath in the 
fullest sense of the word. Simplest in means and simplest in pattern, it is one 
of the most thoroughgoing in regenerative effect. 
POPULAR REGENERATION THROUGH WESTERN EYES 
The Russian bath is the one type of total regeneration that has remained 
intact to this day. How does an educated mid-eighteenth-century Frenchman 
react on first encountering this age-old type of regeneration? Since this is 
not so much a personal reaction as one typifying the epoch, let us look more 
closely into his report. In 1761, the astronomer Abbe Chappe d'Auteroehe, 
being sent by the French Academy, journeyed to Tobolsk in Siberia there to 
observe the eclipse of Venus. He later traveled with a similar aim to California, 
where he met his death in 1769. True to eighteenth-century universalism, his 
interest embraced the most diverse fields. He treats of geographical, geological, 
26 
physical, religious, and ethnological matters. His three folio volumes are 
the unembellished record of customs he observed, which struck or shocked 
him: executions by two adroit blows of the Knut, the tearing out of tongues, 
or his experiences in bathing as the Russians. 
The Abbe had heard much talk of this bath on his eastward journey, and, 
thermometer in hand, he wished to test its effect on his own hody. Deep in 
Russia on a winter's morning, he resolved to let himself be sledded from the 
house where he was staying to the bath hut by the river. He opened the door 
but such ' clouds of smoke' swirled around him that he quickly shut it again. 
'I thought that a conflagration bad broken out in the bathhouse .... ' But one 
of the Russians would not cease his persuasion until the Abbe gave in. 'The 
abnormal heat was far from what I was prepared to meet with, for I had sup­
posed that these baths were intended for cleansing.' They eventually gave 
him to understand that he was expected to perspire. But, he adds, 'As I was quite 
satisfied with my state of health I resolved to leave straightaway.' Not wishing, 
however, to offend the good people who bad heated the bath overnight for his 
benefit, be made a third attempt. 'I undressed quickly and instantly fell to 
sweating.' The heat goes to his head; he imagines he is sitting on red-hot iron, 
26 
Voyage en Siberie fait par ordre du roi en 1761 ... par M. r Abbe Chappe d'A uleroche de l' AcadJmie 
Royale des &iences, Paris, 1768, vol. 1. 
648 