This hread had to he thoroughly haked. It should he neither soft nor spongy. 
The tough crust formed a natural protection against spoilage and drying out. 
One masticated it thoroughly and at leisure. It gave the teeth something resist­
ant to hite into. 
Often the normal area of the crust was deemed insufficient. Special shapes of 
hread were devised to increase its area. The bread of an Italian baker in New 
York shows in its plastic structure, so well rendered by Herhert Matter, the 
endeavor to enlarge the ernst to the utmost (fig. 104). 
The Italians are masters at thus extending the loaf's surface, and often draw 
their products into Baroque shapes. Indeed it was in the seventeenth century 
that elongated loaves with their greater crust area appeared. The long Paris 
loaves, the several forms of Vienna fancy bread, the salt twist, the cannon, the 
Kaiser roll or crescent, all these are rolled or folded from flat strips of dough, 
thus favoring the formation of crust and allowing the oven's heat thoroughly to 
88 
penetrate the whole. Such hread is usually hroken rather than cut.
Fm1ctionally considered this means that the eater must hring his teeth and 
jaw muscles into play, and that he will experience the full flavor of the loaf. 
Bread must have a hard crust if it is to give work to the jaws. During America's 
important preparatory period between 1830 and 1850, a number of reformers 
took up the prohlem of nutrition with the spirit and independence that other 
of their countrymen brought to the reshaping of age-old tools. 
Sylvester Graham (1794-1351) was the leading figure whose name is still 
associated in all countries with the coarse-ground whole-wheat flour he advocated. 
Graham was not alone. He initiated a movement that enlisted the support of 
experts and found an echo in university circles." 
90 
'Bread,' Graham writes in 1837, 'should he baked in such a way that it 
will, as a general statement, require and secure a full exercise of the teeth in masti-
ss Excellent explanatory figures on the making of these hread types are found in John Kirkland's The 
Modern Baker, London, 1924, voL 1, pp.198-202. 
9 
8 The Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, no. xm, 21 Oct. 1835, p.l78, thus reviews a lecture 'On 
the Science of Human Life' which Graham delivered in that city: 'We are utterly amazed at the ridicule 
with which this gentleman has been as.-;ailed in other places .... With such strict regard to the pesitive 
indications of nature as he exhibits, based upon known physical laws, there is no denying his propositions. 
Both his language and his illustrations were in accordance with the best medical authors ... .' Cf. 
Richard Osborne Cummings, The American and His Food, Chicago, 194.0, pp.47-8. This book is indispen· 
sablt~ for the history of American nutrition. In many cases it has relieved us of the need to go into 
further detail. The author has combined breadth of outlook with the use of primary sources. He gives 
a short hut pregnant survey of the activity of the American reformers between 1830 and 1850 (pp.43-53). 
The best insight into the matter is to be gathered from Graham's own writings. Cf. also Richard H. 
Shryock, 'Sylvester Graham and the Popular Health Movement,' Mississippi Valley Historical Review, 
Cedar Rapids, vol. 18, 1931, pp.172-183. 
90 Sylvester Graham, Treatise on Bread and Breadmaking, Boston, 1837, p.87. 
202 