This movement, as against the English arts and crafts, was simply called 
'Craftsman': Craftsman houses, craftsman furniture, craftsman farms.' It 
did not seek individuality in furniture. Back to the ways of our pioneer fore­
fathers l A spokesman argues that it 'represents the fundamental sturdiness 
of the American point of view ... seeking the inspiration of the same law of 
3 
direct answer to need that animated the craftsman of earlier days.' 
The movement shares many points of agreement with the Europeans: It 
condemns the 'black walnut parlour suites' mass produced in Grand Rapids. 
It wishes flat, unpainted, unornamented wood. H is against heavy draperies 
and artificial coating, and has a good feeling for well-lighted, sun-flooded rooms, 
with the kitchen table placed beneath the window. It leans, as in Europe, to 
chairs or sofas of well-made wicker. Its forms are kept deliberately stiff and 
severe. Many of the wooden chairs, particularly the spindle chair with slender 
wooden memhers, might have stood in an interior by Frank Lloyd Wright. 
Most of its furniture was rough and heavy. Visible pegging and dovetailing 
seemed an asset. Later, the whole movement gained the name of 'mission style.' 
But primitiveness of fashion was all that the style had in common with the late 
eighteenth-century furniture of Califomia monasteries. 
The American craftsman movement lacked inventive artists. It had its own 
mouthpiece, The Craftsman, still read in the second clecade of the century. But 
from the start it had no chance of survival. Even if seconded by real genius, 
such attempts must have been abortive in an enviromnent growing ever closer 
to full mechanization. 
From time to time, The Craftsman would carry designs of benches, book­
shelves, tables or chests, 'solely for the purpose of the home-worker.' One 
25-cent booklet of the Papular Mechanics series addresses the amateur on 'Mis­
4 
sion Furniture, How to Make It.' The movement was to end in a hobby. 
The Architect, Former of Types 
On Continental soil, the Morris movement had a different outcome. Its 
influence took two divergent paths. In one direction, it gave status to the decora­
tive artist, who is a professionally reformistic designer. His changing of super­
ficial form for playful effect was a peril from the start. The moral purity of 
Morris's teaching was lost as it became reconciled to the ruling taste. This 
2 
The movement had its own periodical, The Craftsman, published from 1901 to 1916. 
3 
Stickley, op.cit. p.l59. 
'Henry H. Windsor, Mission Furniture, IIow to Make It, Chicago, c.l909-12. 
483 