In sitting, the problem was to maintain the hody as relaxed as possible, while 
performing its tasks~ to insinuate rest into the midst of activity. 
But lying, and the postures between sitting and lying that now steadily gain 
favor, call for relaxation in a passive state~from the simple adjustable lounges, 
railroad seats, barbers' chairs, to complicated operating tables. 
The starting point is found in circumstances where the hody requires special 
care: among the sick and the bedridden. 
As is so often the case, the trail leads hack to an English patent of the early 
seventeenth century. All we have to go on is a rather incomplete description: 
'A Backframe or Back-Screene for Bedridden Invalids ... for the Ease and 
Beliefe of such sick Persons ... as are troubled with Reate on their Backes 
14 
through continuing lying on their Beddes.' 
In the late eighteenth century, hed machines were constructed in which the 
mattress was divided into three mobile sectious corresponding to the legs, 
thighs, and back. At first, cumbersome wooden constructions held these sec­
15 
tions; heavy iron worm-and-gear drive was used later (fig. 243), as in the first 
decades of the nineteenth century. 
16
Chairs convertible into beds~ a few are preserved - existed in the eight­
eenth century. The nineteenth sets itself an altogether different task: to develop 
what is neither bed nor chair, hut hybrid furniture that will fluctuate between 
the chair and the couch without sudden transformation. 
The early phases take place in England and in France. They are still unin­
17 
vestigated but do not seem a very promising field.
America~ starting in the late 'thirties, and at a growing pace from 1850 ~ 
dearly takes the lead. Among the earliest of this type, 'the Variety-Couch or 
18 
Invalid-Chair' of 1838 (fig. 245) contains the nucleus of the future develop­
ment: 'The basis is formed hy a stool with legs and casters. The back of the 
couch may he placed at any desired degree of inclination, even vertically or 
horizontally, hy means of a spring-bolt and circular segments.' Provision is 
14 British Patent No.l6, A.D. 1620. 
ts As for instance: British Patent No.3744, 1 Nov. 1813: 'Sofa or machine for the care of invalids.' 
16 
Cf. Macquoid and Edwards, Dictionary of English Furniture from ihe Middle Ages to the late Georgian 
Period, vol. n, op.cit. p.lM: a reclining bed 'to be converted into a winged arm chair.' The date attnD­
uted, 1730, seems rather too early. American examples of the same type, furniture 'which may serve 
either as a Queen Ann winged chair or a cushion day-bed' is shown in Wallace, 'Double purpose furniture,' 
Antiques, vol. 38, no.4 (1940), p.I60. 
11 
For example, 'Minter's Reclining Chair,' British Patent No.6034., A.D. 1830, with 'self-adjusting 
leverage of the hack and seat.' Or 'Chairs or machines mlculated to increase eao;e and comfort,' British 
Patent 5490, 28 Aug. 1827. Here the back rest is already equipped with two binges for adjustability. In 
France even more complicated maehines were built at this time: 'Surgieal Chair Bed,' British Patent 
No.5605, A.D. 1828; the French inventor's patent speciiieation extends to ten pages, 
1s U.S. Patent 775, 12 June 1838, 
408 