The whole installation bears witness to the care with which the individual 
animal was treated. The great lairages (bergeries), with their lofts under the high 
roofs and their careful design, might have stood in a farmyard; each ox had a 
stall to itself. Dominating tbe long rows of low slaughterhouses and administra­
tive buildings were three gigantic halls of glass and iron, elegant in design. The 
central hall, with its nine aisles over 800 feet long (286m.) served as a 'cattle­
shelter' (abri pour brenfs). Here tbe animals were bought and sold. The two 
flanking iron constructions were intended for swine, sheep, and calves. 
Later critics have dealt severely with Haussmann's central slaughterhouse. 
Around 1900 he was taxed with having 'brought no modification to the disposi­
6 
tions adopted in 1810 for the first five abattoirs.' This is perfectly true so far 
as the technical scheme is concerned. But such improvements were nowhere 
to be found in the Europe of 1860. At that time, even in America, mechanical 
aids to slaughtering had not emerged from tbe experimental stage. 
Certainly this criticism holds good for the methods of operation that prevailed 
throughout La Villette. A glance into the balls in which the carcasses were 
quartered attests the calm of the handicraft that no cog-wheel, no conveyor has 
the end of the 'eighties, when in Chicago the assembly 
shaken; and this toward 
line had been developed. 
In this curious symbiosis of handicraft with centralization lies the peculiarity 
of this establishment as well as of many others in Europe. In La Villette­
another point of criticism - each ox had a separate booth in which it was felled. 
This is a survival of handicraft practices, to which the routine of mass slaughter­
ing is unknown. The long houses in which the cattle were slaughtered consisted 
of rows of single cabins set side hy side. Loug since, technical installations and 
slaughtering in large halls have superseded them. It may well be that this treat­
ment in separate booths expresses the deeply rooted experience that the beasts can 
be raised only at the cost of constant care and attention to the individual animal. 
The Great Plains beyond the Mississippi, where free tracts of grassland can 
be dominated from horseback and where the herds grow up ahnost without care, 
are implicitly related to the assembly line. In just the same way the peasant 
farm, where each cow has its name and has to he attended when giving hirth 
to its calf, is linked to handicraft methods in slaughtering. 
La Villette and Union Stock Yards (1864) 
This difference between tbe painstakingly raised animal and the herds grow­
ing np at minimum effort on the prairie is likewise reflected in the planning of 
tbe sla ugbtering centers. 
6 
L'abattoir moderm, 2nd ed., Paris, 1916, p.45. 
211 