Aalto's starting point was the cantilever chair of tubular steel. His first model 
(I93I) bas a steel-tube frame on which is screwed a curved plywood slab form足
ing the seat and back. The frame recalls Breuer's staekiug stool of 1926, but 
stood ou end. The original feature of this chair is its curved plywood slab, used 
as an element of construction- for the back, part of this single slab was lam足
inated and unsupported. 
This resilient plywood slab foreshadows Aalto's next step: the cantilever 
chair made of wood. Here he utilized the elasticity peculiar to birchwood, a 
springiness that the Northern countries had formerly used ouly in skis. For 
its bearing elements, Aalto chose laminated wood of suitable thickness (fig. 333). 
In outline it is identical with the tubular cantilever chair. These laminated 
strips, fonning in one continuous line the 'runners,' legs, arms, and frame to 
carry the back rest, are first bent by steam and machinery into broad curved 
slabs, then sawed up into narrower sections. Two of these sections are bridged 
hy a pad seat or one of curved plywood. 
The bearing elements of the Aalto chair are not of an unambiguous skeleton 
construction, as the tubular chairs; the supporting sections by origin, and 
perhaps by mechanical function, are to be regarded as slabs. 
Bent plywood chairs, where a single curved slab forms the back, seat, and 
leg sections, are found in America during the 'seventies. The Museum of Mod足
ern Art, New York, owns an inventor's model of,it874, saved from the riddance足
auction of the American Patent Office'" (figs. 331, 332). 'The chair is made of 
several parts which are obtained by pressing several layers of veneer of suitable 
size and thickness into forms of corresponding shape. If three layers of veneer 
are used, the grain of the middle one runs crosswise to that of the outer layers 
... the elasticity and strength of the veneers are thereby increased considerably 
. . . The chair is made of three parts ... and the front part ... extends up 
21 
over the upper part of the back.' 
Directions for the bending of plywood sheets to the human body and for 
sawing them appear long before Aalto's chairs in many American woodworker's 
handbooks. In Holland also, G. Rietveld curved slabs of plywood or fiber and 
fixed them between iron rods. But no one exploited the resiliency that Aalto 
drew from the Finnish birch. No one dared to use laminated wood in cantilever 
construction. Which was decisive here, form or technique? 
None of the moderns knew what tremendous pioneer work America had 
accomplished in this field; work that lay buried and forgotten in its own land. 
It is the problem of resilient seating that appears again in the wooden chair. 
But only in its later European form, for the early American models such as that 
11 
to U.S. Patent 148,350, 10 Mar. 1874. Ibid. Patent Specification. 
506 