from the sitting position to the lying. By the early 'seventies there had reached 
the market simple models in which a common mechanism interconnects the 
foot, the body, and the head rests." But these are rather the exception. The 
separation of the chair and the fooL rest persists until late in the 'eighties. The 
chair is four-legged and its separate footstool sometimes attains the size of a 
praying-desk (fig. 251). Then comes the demand for a chair that will revolve." 
And so it is mounted on a column similar to that of the office chair, radiating 
four short legs (fig. 254). By the early 'nineties, the harher's chair has become 
both reclining and revolving. Now raising and lowering are added, so that 
the chair may stand 'low enough for the short harher and high enough for the 
tall barber.' By 1900 " raising and lowering are carried out hy fluid-operated 
mechanisms (fig. 252). Hydraulic drive, as we have seen, had already appeared 
during the 'sixties in the dentist's chair. Only the rising American living standard 
around the turn of the century made possible this expensive mechanism, which 
ahnost doubled the price of the harher chair." By about 1900, then, the chair 
is eapahle of four movements: revolving and reclining; raising and lowering. 
Around 1910 it reaches the standard, present-day form: smooth, white-enameled 
frame and armrests, and a smooth base displace the writhing cast-iron orna­
mentation, rrow confined to the iron leg and foot rests (fig. 255). A light squeeze 
of the trigger will release the tilting mechanism arrd the chair automatically 
locks in position when the finger is removed. The moving parts- more than 
200 in number- remain out of sight irr the white enamel base so that the cus­
tomer is lowered without noise or jolt irrto the horizontal, to await massage 
and hot towels: a moment of relaxation amid the rush. 
MECHANIZATION OF THE RECLINING CHAIR 
Barber's chairs, railroad seats, and operating tables are not part of our con­
stant surroundings. They do not helorrg to the home. But they made excellent 
task-masters wherr it came to operrirrg up the unknown sphere of movable furni­
ture. The vigor of this patent furniture snited it, irr simplified form, to enter 
the intimacy of the home. For a long time the Americans successfully accom­
plished this acclimatization. 
It would he a mistake to focus our attention orr mechanization alone. We 
must look beyond. These chairs express the true nineteenth-century posture, 
postttre, 
whose keynote is informality. Lorrnges and sofas, expressing such 
27 
Catalogue of the 'fheo. A. Koohs Company, Chicago, 1873. Cf. also fig. 279. 
28
U.S. Patent 335,594, 9 Feh. 1886 and 374,840, 13 Dec.l887. 
29 
U.S. Patent 598,877, 8 Feb. 1898. 
30 
$85 in 1904. 
418 