This is the period when the patent-furniture movement neared its end. Like 
the fashionable interiors of the period, the sleeping cars and the dining cars 
succumbed in the 'nineties to superficial luxury. They were overfestooned with 
Rococo ornamentation, and their high curved ceiling- known as 'full empire' 
-masqueraded as a stone vault. In one of his articles, Edward Bok, editor 
of the Ladies' Home Journal, sharply attacked this 'veritable riot of the worst 
conceivable ideas.' He learned that 'women whose husbands had recently 
acquired means' were ordering of their furnishers 'certain styles of decoration 
and hangings which they had seen in the Pullman parlor-cars. . . . Every foot 
of wood-panelling was carved and ornamented ... gilt was recklessly laid on 
everywhere. . . . Mirrors with bronzed and rcd-plushed frames were the order 
63 
of the day.' 
George W. Pullman and Luxury in Travel 
If George M. Pulhuan he measured by his technical inventions, he loses in 
stature. On that score, any of the anonymous constructors of patent furniture 
can lay equal claim. In the early, the decisive days, he was less keen for tech足
nical innovations than for the use of them in comhinations. 
When at length, in 1864, he entered his first patent together with another 
inventor, he was following some hundred predecessors in the field of the sleep足
ing ear. And even this patent was relatively old fashioned; it still followed the 
64 
principle of mooring the upper berth flush with the ceiling. Only in his second 
65 
patent, of September in the following year, did the upper berth appear as a 
flap that swings down on hinges above the window and folds away to the ceiling 
in an inclined position. This original construction, in which the hed folds away 
to an inclined position, he derived from one of his predecessors. He adopted 
it in his famous Pioneer of 1865, and it has remained standard in America to 
this day. We shall return to it in discussing the convertibility of sleeping-car 
furniture. 
Pullman's strength, then, was not in mechanical devices: Here he availed 
himself of anything appropriate to his purposes. His strength lay in quite 
another sphere, not the technical hut the sociological. His invention was luxury 
in travel. This was his domain. Here he showed his creative capacity, outstrip足
ping all others in foresight, strate,gy, and boldness. Here he was able to work 
out and enlarge his idea to the utmost. Here he gained overwhehning and last足
mg success. 
63 
The Americanization of Edward &)k, New York, 1921, p.251. 
61 
U.S. Patent 42,182, Field and Punman, 5 Apr. 1864. 
66 
U.S. Patent 49,992, Field and Pullman, Sleeping Car, 19 Sept. 1865. 
452 