the coming development as a whole: co-ordination and freedom of treatment­
no rigid, ever-repeated mold, adequate to everything and lo nothing. The 
solution of the bath unit, of the mechanical core assembled from standardized 
elements, lies in this direction. A house is neither an automobile nor a trailer. 
Houses do not move. Houses stand on a specific site ami must adapt themselves 
to this environment. Houses rolling ready-made off the assembly line will but 
rarely satisfy on this score. Hence, the solution of the mechanical core, like 
that of the prefabricated house, depends on one condition: freedom allied with 
co-ordination. For neither he who dwells in the house nor be who designs it 
should suffer biroself to be tied. That is, the task of mechanization is not to 
deliver ready-made, stamped-out houses or mechanical cores, but flexible, 
standardized elements admitting of various constellations, so as to create better 
and more comfortable dwellings. 
Regeneration a Gauge of Culture 
Our aim throughout has been to trace the two basic types of bathing: the 
bath as an ablution and the bath as total regeneration. Both types are often 
found together, one usually dominating the other. Closely connected with the 
type of bath is its social significance. The ablution bath, by its very type, easily 
leads to the position that bathing is a private matter. Of this view, the tub 
bath, especially in its present-day mechanized form, is the chief exponent. 
The regeneration bath, by its very type, favors social intercourse and ahnost 
automatically becomes a focus of communal life. 
Periods have developed various types of regeneration just as they developed 
various types of comfort. The Greeks, in their regenerative type, were able to 
interweave invigoration of the body and invigoration of the mind to a degree 
unequaled by any other culture. Operating within a universal framework, 
their bath type did not have to be a complicated one. The Greeks of the fifth 
century B.C. were little inclined to technical refinement. 
Not until post-Alexandrian tiroes did the scientific thought of the Greeks 
move closer to practical ends. The basis which Alexandria had laid in the third 
and second centuries B.c., Roman engineering fully elaborated in the first. The 
thermae of the Roman masses have their center in the now-dominant hot-air 
hath and its accessories, the universal Greek framework, however, not being 
altogether discarded. 
But in the Islamic type of regeneration, the games and athletics - self­
invigoration- fall away. Instead, the organism is penetratingly worked upon by 
various massages, especially cracking of the joints, perhaps brought from India. 
711 