picked. He reached the solution of using no key at all. His 'dial combination 
locks' had two handles or knobs which, meeting in a certain combi:oation, shot 
a numher of heavy bolts. The principle of the dial lock was not unknown to 
former centuries, hut it was Linus Yale, Jr., who made this primitive idea func­
tion as part of a highly complex mechanism, opening the way for all later 
developments. 
Linus Yale's Invention 
These intricate hank locks do not yield the necessary insight into the change 
from manual to mechanical production in the sphere of the locksmith. The 
parts of their complex mechanisms are almost entirely handmade. They are 
the refined product of elaborate craftsmanship, haute serrurerie. What revolu­
tionized the manufacture of locks was the simple familiar door lock that still 
bears the name ofits inventor, Yale. The change that concerns us is not one of 
merely producing by machine the parts that formerly had been made by hand. 
The interesting thing, in this case, is the transformation of the whole interior 
organism of the lock, from its technical construction down to its key. 
It is not easy for man to leave the heaten track: to do so often means hreaking 
so deeply rooteii a habit as opening or closing his desk drawer or his front door 
in a customary way. Yet this was the very change wrought hy Linus Yale, Jr., 
with his pinctumbler cylinder lock. Save for the specialists, few know the device 
hy its technical name; rather, it has heen indiscriminately and simply called 'Yale 
lock.' Nevertheless its use spread slowly. It is not mentioned in Pitt-Rivers' ex­
cellent hook, On the Developrrwnt and Distribution of Primitive Locks and Keys, 
published in London in 1333. In Europe, this lock has come into general use 
only in the course of the last two decades, even in countries having, like Switzer­
land, a high standard of living. Presumably the introduction of American auto­
mobiles in Europe is connected with the spread of the lock on the Continent. 
Linus Yale's bank lock of 1351, on the other hand, became known in England 
soon after it was invented. 
Linus Yale, Jr., was born in 1821 in Salishnry, Conn., where his father kept 
a locksmith's shop. Young Yale was reared in the atmosphere of lockmaking 
and invention, then hreathed everywhere in the northeastern United States. 
1
We know but little concerning his brief life. ' He died of heart failure suddenly, 
at the age of 47, while away on husiness in New York in the Christmas of 1868. 
His financial position seems never to have been rosy. In July 1368, six months 
before his death, he met Henry R. Towne, and in October they organized a 
16 
No study of his life has been published. The account of him in the Encyclopedia Americana, vol. 
XXIX (1940 edition), contains inaccuracies and makes no mention of his great invention. 
62 