began his studies while working as a large-scale contracting engineer in Boston. 
He investigated the best way of doing work- in industry and handicrafts 
indifferently. 
The freshness and directness with which the age-old manipulations were 
observed -- Taylor studied the coal-shoveler, Gilbreth the bricklayer - form 
perhaps the closest parallel to the functional improvement of such traditionary 
tools as the hammer, saw, spade, or plane in America from around 1830. Gilbreth 
47 
gives us a step hy step account of how without elaborate apparatus he pro足
ceeded in rationalizing the most traditionary trade of bricklaying. An adjustable 
scaffold for piling up the bricks was all he used. lt did away with the ,-orkman's 
need to 'hend over and raise the weight of his hody a thousand times a day,' thus 
almost tripling a man's daily output, from 1000 to 2700 bricks. 
The method responsible for this was the study of motion. From the question: 
'How long does it take to do a piece of work?' one came to a representation of 
the path and elements of a movement. Soon the stop watch was eliminated, 
to he replaced by objective recording apparatus. The Gilhreths were thus led 
deeper and deeper toward the inside of human motion and its visualization. 
This was accomplished throu;;h time and space studies. 
Scientific Management and Contemporary Art 
Scientific management, like the assemhly line, is deeply concerned with organ足
ization. But its most significant achievement is the study of the human work 
process, the way work is performed by the worker. 
The purpose of research in scientific management is: 'Analyzing tl1e motions 
of the ,-orkmen in the machine shop ... all the operations for example which 
48 
were performed while putting work into or taking work out from the machine.' 
This should eliminate unnecessary motions and reduce the time of an operation 
to a minimum. lf we temporarily set aside all technical details and inquire into 
the essenc.e of the methods employed, we find that they center around space足
time studies. Their purpose was to determine the path of a motion through space 
and its duration in time. 
In formulating the laws of mechanics, the physicists of the Renaissance inves足
tigated the relation between motion and time. The laws of human work are 
now investigated in a similar way, so that rough guessing and rnle of thumh 
may yield to precise laws, so far as is possible in the human sphere. 
What interests us here is the plunge inside the working process. 
4
7 Frank B. Gilbreth, Bricklaying System, New York, 1909. 
4
ll F. B. Copley, op,cit. vol. 1, p.223. 
101 