years earlier. The tourteen-hour day, she found, was toil beyond the girls' 
endurance: 'At five the bells <filled for labor .... Work prosecuted without 
remission till twelve ... then half an hour allowed for dinner and work till seven 
o'clock.' And finally she came to 'another class of evils endured hy a large class 
of well-educated, umnarried women of the more wealthy classes. . . . It is the 
sufl'cring which results from inactivity.' 
Catherine Beecher's aim was not the achievement of outward power. She 
was thoroughly opposed to feminism in the political field. Her goal was to give 
women self-assurance and confidence in their profession. That is why all her 
life she demanded that 'domestic economy' he taught in the schools as a science 
no less than physics and mathematics. Only properly trained women could 
rise to the status for which they were destined. 
The Servant Problem 
With the same forthrightness, Catherine E. Beecher faced the servant problem. 
!'>he saw here a social issue ahnost beyond solution in America. !'>he was sensitive 
to the basic paradox of 'domestic service' within a democratic state. 
'There is no point where the women of this country need more wisdom than 
in relation to those whom they employ in their services,' she wrote in 1841 in 
her chapter 'On the Care of Domestics.' 'The subject is attended with many 
difficulties. The peculiar trials which American women suffer from this source 
4 
are the necessary evils connected with our most valuable civil blessings.' 
With her sister, Harriet Beecher StDwe, author of Uncle Tom's Cabin, she 
completely rewrote her textbook on domestic economy. The new version, 
dedicated to the' American woman' and entitled The American Woman's Home, 
appeared in 1869. Here the earlier fragmentary hints were elaborated: 'Every 
human being stands (according to the Declaration of Independence) on the 
same level. . . . There are no hereditary titles, no monopolies, no privileged 
classes. . . . All are to he free to rise and to fall as the waves of the sea .... 
The condition of domestic service, however, still retains about it something of 
5 
the influence from feudal times.' 
The pseudo-feudalistic conditions then prevalent in Europe are brought out 
by comparison of America with England: 'In England the class who go to service 
are a class and service is a profession. . . . In America domestic service is a 
6 
spring-stone to something higher.' 
1
4 A Treatise on Domestic Economy, p.20 1·. 
s Catherine E. Beecher and Harriet Beecher Stowe, The American Woman'sllame, New York, 1869, 
p.318. 
6 
Ibid. p.321. 
515 