agitator seattered the yeast particles throughout the dough. Uniformity and 
the increasing stress on appearance entered hand in hand. 
Today the puhlic demands that their eggs shall have yolks of uniform color. 
One city prefers a light yellow, another a deep orange. Industry provides the 
corresponding chlcken feed, which, with the help of artificial coloring, never 
to produce yolks of the same shade. 
fails 
Public taste is not so particular about the color of bread crust, hut here too 
any required tint can be precisely obtained by means of thermostats and added 
ingredients. The neat wrapper, often hlghly effective from the advertising 
standpoint, in addition to keeping the bread clean and fresh, satisfies the de­
mand for uniformity (fig. 103). 
CHANGES IN STRUCTURE 
The bread of full me,ehanization has the resiliency of a ruhher sponge. When 
squeezed it returns to its former shape. The loaf becomes constantly whlter, 
more elastic, and frothler. This is not the result of mechanization alone. With 
the increasingly complex machlnery and greater capital outlays, new ways of 
pushlng consumption had to be devised. 
Since mechanization, it has often been pointed out, white bread has become 
much richer in fats, milk, and sugar. But these are added largely to stimulate 
sales hy heightening the loaf's eye-appeal. The shortenings used in bread, a 
leading authority states, are 'primarily for the purpose of imparting desirable 
73 
tender eating or chewing qualities to the finished product.' They produce the 
'soft velvet crumb,' a cakelike structure, so that the bread is half-mastieated, 
as it were, before reaching the mouth. 
About 6 per cent of sugar is usually added to whlte bread. Tlrls too makes for 
looseness of structure and imparts a slight sweetness. Moreover it stimulates 
fermentation. But above all, sugar is 'the source of crust mlor .' If the amount 
is reduced, the thln crust becomes 'pale and unattractive' in appearance instead 
of being infused with that golden-yellow gloss, like those bright red apples 
whose appetizing exterior has almost driven out other varieties of less dazzling 
appearance but more delicate flavor. 
Mechanization does not stand still. We have mentioned those proposals of 
the 1930's for cooling the bread more rapidly, under atmospheric, followed hy 
74 
subatmospheric, pressure. In a later patent the inventor turns to good advan­
tage the opportunity of the woling phase for further work upon the make-up. 
While the loaf is having its dampness extracted in the vacuum chamber, it is 
7~ Julius B. Wihlfa.hrt, op.cit. 
74 British Patent No. 13974-76, 19 Jan. 1937. 
193 