In 1750, in his essay on universal history, long before he became the reform min­
ister of Lonis XVI, the young Turgot proclaimed a noble belief in man's perfecti­
bility: 'The human species remains the same through all its upheavals, like 
the waters of the sea through its tempests, and constantly advances toward 
perfection.' This belief in man's perfectibility became basic to any creed of 
progress. 
The conception expressed by Turgot at the age of twenty -three became one of 
the incentives of the nineteenth-century urge to expand. Turgot was first to 
give physics a high priority over all other human knowledge. Art- being con­
cerned only with human feelings -seemed to him limited in contrast to the 
limitlessness of science: 'Les sciences sont immenses comme Ia nature. Les arts, 
qui ne sont que des rapports a nous-mCmes, sont horn€8 comme no us.' 
In the late eighteenth century, Condorcet in his last book pictured the long 
succession of epochs ascending toward the 'infinite perfectibility of mankind.' 
In the nineteenth century, revolutionaries and capitalists alike based their 
motives of action on the creed of progress. Comte's sociology is imbued with 
eighteenth-century thinking. Just a century after Turgot, Proudbon patheti­
cally proclaims in his Philnsophie du progres, 1851: 'That which dominates all my 
efforts, their principle and their end, their base and their crown ... that which 
I allirm, resolutely and irrevocably, in all ways and all places [is] progress.' 
Proudhon emphasizes that he understands by progress - in contrast to the 
abuse of the word in a purely materialistic sense - 'Ia marche de Ia societe dans 
l'histoire.' The same belief stands invisibly behind Karl Marx's scientific solu­
tion of the social problem: the infinite perfectibility of man. 
How was it possible for the foundation and very core of nineteenth-century 
thought and action to collapse so hopelessly? 
Without a doubt, it was that mechanization was misused to exploit both earth 
and man with complete irresponsibility. Often it penetrated domains that were 
by nature unsnited to it. We have tried, here and there, to show the effects and 
limits of mechanization. No need to repeat this anew. The way in which this 
period handled mechanization is no isolated phenomenon. It has occurred 
practically everywhere. Means have outgrown man. 
716 