The saw, a basic tool of the joiner, was but sparingly used for medieval furni­
ture. Although a more complicated tool than the adze and woodcarver's knife, 
the saw does not so readily convey to the wood each flexion of the hand. That, 
perhaps, is why the Middle Ages seem to have relied so little upon it. They 
were acquainted with the frame saw, inherited from the Romans and still cur­
rent today. Frame saws with adjustable blades, as miniatures show, were in 
nse by the fourteenth century. In keeping with the clear lack of interest in 
perfected joinery was the slow development of the sawmill, which was present 
18 
for centuries before being pnt to wider use.
Medieval furniture never frees il.seif from the massive wooden plank. The 
elements of construction were massive planks. No difference was made between 
the face of the chest and its uprights: 'The front face was formed ordinarily by 
a mighty piece of wood placed longitudinally. The uprights- styles -were 
made of other rough boards.' Measuring often 12 inches in width, they could 
easily be hewn out by adzes." 
When fixed tables other than the demountable trestle type appeared, in the 
fifteenth century, the table top rested on supports treated like boards along its 
entire width. If the Italian Renaissance treated these heavy boards in console 
manner and carved them over with exuberant oruament, it in no way altered the 
basic heaviness of the typo. Nor was it otherwise with the bench, the chest, ami 
the chair: They consisted of massive planks without framework. 
The joinery was primitive: Boards were put roughly edge to edge and nailed. 
Notched grooves did not afford enough rigidity. Hence many chests were bound 
with iron ornamentation, while the strap hinges of the doors were much broad­
20
ened and lengthened. The tall and narrow gable wardrobes - the few pieces 
we possess - are strengthened with hinges such as these, and iron bands, for 
their wooden construction alone did not insure stability. 
In the course of the fourteenth century, the upright boards, particularly in 
the chest, gradually shrink irtto corner posts- one step toward the wooden 
skeleton." The boards are provided with tongues, and the uprights with grooves. 
u In the famous sketchbook of the architect Villars de Honcourt (c.l245) one 'rmds a sawmill driven 
by water power; the posts and supports consist of knotty branches; the whole presents a rather fantastic 
picture. The oldest accredited sawmill was in Augsburg in 1322. Its use seems to have been accepted 
with hesitation, for the next mention of a sawmill eomes a hundred years Inter, in 14-27, this time in 
Breslau. The Chronique de Charlemagne of H60 (MusCe National, Brussels) contains an illustration of 
siege in which the pitsaw operated hy two men is seen at work. At this time wooden frame construction 
came into general use. These sour<JeS are illustrated in the excellent little book by Franz Maria Feldhaus, 
Die Saege, Ein Rueckblick auf vier Jahrfaw;ende, Berlin, 1921. 
1
9 Fred Roe, Ancient Church Chests and Chairs, London, 1929, p.12. 
2o Falke and Schmitz, op.cit. 
21 The Romanesque benches and throne seat.-'.; with their heavy turned posts barred any opportunity 
for technical development in their construction. T4ei:r technique belonged to another :medi1_1m, sWu~;~. 
280 