Mechanization of the Bath 
The history of its technical equipment affords no standard hy which to 
evaluate the modern hath. Closer insight is immediately gained in registering 
the uncertainty and wavering throughout the century from the moment a choice 
between types became necessary. 
Just as it left no style untouched, the nineteenth century left none of the 
historical types untried. But scant progress was made, outside of reformistic 
propaganda or the development of luxury bathrooms. For the masses of the 
population, only the cheapest mode of bathing was seriously debated. 
The chaos around 1900 appears in the failure of the expert to recommend a 
single satisfactory hathtuh. But even this would have offered no historically 
acceptable standard, and the question remains: is bathing a simple ablution, 
or is it part of a broader concept, regeneration of the human organism? Looking 
backward, we find that in past cultures the hath was embodied in types afford足
ing total regeneration. Though shortened to the utmost, a typology of Western 
regeneration will have to be drawn up. Ancient, Islamic, Late Gothic, Russian 
regeneration seem to reflect a common archetype, its path traceable to the interior 
of Asia. 
All these types aim not merely at outward ablution, hut at a total vivification 
of the body hy differentiated means, which vary with the culture. Our civilization 
from the waning Middle Ages on has believed that it can do without a systematic 
type of regeneration to help the organism recoup the damage which each civiliza足
tion in its own way entails. 
Mechanization did no more than give a glittering fac;ade to the most primitive 
type of hath. 
Toward a Typological Approach 
A treatment of problems suited to our day will constantly hear interrelations 
in mind. This leads to a typological approach. The history of styles follows its 
theme along a horizontal direction; the history of types along a vertical one. 
Both are necessary if things are to he seen in historical space. 
The specialistic approach that grew in strength through the nineteenth cen足
tury brought stylistic history to the fore. Typological thinking rarely fmds a 
place there, and mainly when unavoidable, as is the case in the encyclopedias 
of furniture. The French contributions around 1880, in which a vein of univer足
sality still runs, are the more satisfactory in this respect. The large Oxford 
English Dictionary too is sometimes a friend in need. 
We are interested in following the growth of phenomena, or if one will, in 
lO 