among furniture. The concentration of the heat source has been carried to 
its logical conclusion. 
The Electrical Heut Source 
Electrification shrinks the heat source to a mere spiral of wire, a thin resistance, 
which the current causes to glow and radiate heat. From the first, the main 
tssk was to bring this radiation in close contact with the object to he heated. 
The problem was technically solved in several ways, no change of principle 
being involved. Now heat is instantaneously produced without so much as the 
striking of a match. 
The creation of heat without visible source went counter to the age-old asso­
ciation of heat with flame. Yet gas fuel had opened the public mind to new and 
unfamiliar methods. The gas range had taken eight decades to he introduced; 
the electric range no more than half that span. Now around 1930, household 
mechanization, previously a cause of hesitation and distrust, became the strong­
est of sales' inducements. 
Obstacles there were. Bnt they lay rather in the nature of things. The elec­
trical network was sporadic, current too expensive, the apparatus too highly 
priced and too delicate for the household. 
Fm a long time, a tinge of the wondrous seemed to pervade all things electric. 
There was in truth something to marvel at when the seventy-year-old Michael 
Faraday toured the English lighthouses in 1862 and frrst beheld the practical 
application of his light, or 'magnetic spark' as he called it, which had arisen in 
his hands three decades earlier. 
"\Vhen, late in the 'eighties, the idea of using the current for culinary purposes 
was toyed with, its portrayal was more suggestive of witchcraft than of useful 
invention. One of the popular scientific booklets," then so numerous, reports 
a Canadian invention 'answering to this fantastic desideratum,' cooking by 
electricity (Jig. 364). The description is the more fantastic in that the inventor 
claims to have baked cakes with his apparatus, and these are supposed to have 
an indefinable 'electrical flavor.' 
Yet electrical cooking canght on quickly enough. Practical experiments were 
lirst made in England around 1890. An electrical fair held at the Crystal Palace, 
London, in 1891, is said to have brought the new cooking agent before the 
public." 
M Max de Nansouty, L'Annie induslrielle, Paris, 1887, p.l4. 
MiSociety for Electric Development, Inc., N.Y. The Elec:lric Range Handbook, New York, 1919, p.48. 
542 