barley and coarse wheat flour, used in Graham or barley bread, slide beneath 
the working surfaces. Beneath these, hut not so handily located, are further 
ingredient drawers. 
The board 'for molding bread' may turn over for the preparation of meat or 
vegetables. And the surface next to it, the 'dish drainer,' is on hinges so that 
it may either 'rest on the preparation surface ('cook-form,' as Miss Beecher 
calls it) 'or be turned over and cover the sink.' 
This is 1869, the pre-plumbing period. So Catherine Beecher devises bee own 
running water; near the sink are 'two pumps for well and for rain water.' 
'The width of the sink matches the cook-form,' she expressly says. Thus 
storage and preparation-cleaning are gathered around a single center. In these 
respects she goes beyond the stage of 1910, which conceived the table, dresser 
and range as self-contained elements to be placed side by side. 
To avoid discomfort in summer and to cut down kitchen odors, Catherine 
Beecher places the range in a room apart, which glazed sliding-doors divide 
from the preparation room. 
Organization of the Work Process after 1910 
Anonymous phases link the development of the 'sixties with the next decisive 
moves made around 1910. These sound steps of the 'seventies and 'eighties 
15 
toward kitchen planning in line with American needs are as yet uninvestigated.
To enquire into them would be a rewarding task. 
Now, over four decades after Catherine Beecher's clear framing of the problem, 
there took place a further elaboration down to the most minute details. 
The American woman had meanwhile won all that Catherine Beecher had 
claimed and perhaps more. The influence of woman in American life had become 
than in other countries, and more than in any other land became respon­
stronger 
sible for the sound as well as for the doubtful trends. 
This reorganization of the household undertook, it is true, to set free the 'all 
16 
tired out woman with no energy left.' But the impulse had its roots else­
where: in scientific management. Surveying the growth of the assembly line, 
we spoke of scientific management and its analysis of the work process, research 
that around 1910 was yielding impressive results. It brought people to observe 
afresh age-old domestic tasks, especially in the kitchen; it suggested motion 
studies of single appliances and analysis of overall kitchen planning. 
u; See Space, Time and Architedure, pp.288-9, for a few examples of the 'seventies and 'eighties, 
showing how America gave expression to the cook's and housewife's problems in the plan and arrange-­
ment of the kitchen. 
6 
1 Frederick, The New Howekeeping, Ef.'Miency Studies in Home Management, New York, 1913, preface. 
519 