means of pins or grooves. Vaucanson's looms place him in the long series of 
inventors who, from the seventeenth century on, attempted to solve the auto­
matic manufacture of fabrics. Vaneanson's loom did not have immediate eon­
se,qnences. In 1804 the inventor Jacquard of Lyons assembled the fragments 
8 
of Vancanson's loom in the Paris Conservatoire des Arts et Metiers and thus 
invented his weaving automaton, the Jacquard loom, which has remained stand­
ard to this day, and reproduced mechanically even the most fantastic patterns. 
It is Vancanson's practical activities that are historically the most interesting. 
9 
In 1756 he set up a silk factory at Anbenas near Lyons, improving or inventing 
every detail of the building and of the machinery, even to the reels, which most 
ingeniously joined the threads from the cocoons as they lay in the bath, and 
the twisting frames that spnn them. To the best of our knowledge this is the 
first industrial plant in the modern sense, built nearly two decades before 
Richard Arkwright founded the first successful spinning mills in England. 
V aucanson had insight into the fact that industry could not be housed in wooden 
hut required a eoncentrated plant where every 
shacks or in random buildings, 
detail was carefully thonght out, and whose machines were moved by a single 
10 
power. His treatise gives full details of the plan. The factories- he later 
built a second factory- are three stories high, and well planned in every detail. 
The source of power is a single overshot water wheel. He calls for softened light, 
which is obtained from windows with oiled paper. Primitive ventilation and 
vaulting insure to some extent the moist and temperate atmosphere necessary 
for spinning the silk. Vaucanson set up his spinning machines (rrwnlins a organ­
siner) in large, well-lighted halls. The small models preserved in the Conserva­
toire des Arts et Metiers, Paris, show a striking elegance of construction and 
have an imposing number of vertical spindles. The 'flyers' of the turn of the 
century are antkipated here. What a contrast with the unwieldy four or eight 
spindle constructions used in the first cotton spinning machines of England l 
Yet these efforts came to nothing. Eighteenth-century France was a testing 
ground in ahnost every domain. Ideas arose that eould become reality only in 
the nineteenth century, for they were unable to sink roots in Catholic France 
under the Ancien Regime. Mechanization was among these. 
s Vaucanson himself began a collection of machine models of various kinds, which became the nucleus 
of the Conservatoire des Arts et MHiers during the Revolution. 
~ We give the date as 1756, since in his Miimoires, 1776, Vaucanson speaks of an experiment made at 
Auhenas twenty -years previously. Cf. J. de Vaucanson, 'Sur le Choix de l'Emplacement et sur la 
Forme qu'il faut donner au B3.timent d'une Fahrique d'Organsin,' in HUtoire de l'Academie Royale, 
AmWe 1776, p.168. 
to Precise illustrations of Vaucanson's installation are given. See especially Planches v et VI. 
36 