48. Sweet's Project 
for a Railroad over 
Broadway. 1350's. 
The overhead franeling 
crane moves a heavy 
load through the air. 
The 'sixties were fas­
cinated by the idea of 
hmJering transporta­
tion: !hue are patents 
for conveying male­
rials/or cable railway, 
and fantastic schemes 
such as that for a bal­
loon railway to the lop 
of Mt. Rigi (Fig. 95), 
or for a railway on the 
principle of the travel­
ing crane over Broad­
way in New York. 
(The Scientific Amer­
ican, 15 October, 1853) 
of assembly line. A work team of five bakers is to turn out seventy ships' bis­
C\Uts a minute: twelve ovens; 'each will furnish daily bread for 2040 men.' 
The process of biscuit-making, as practiced at the Victualling Office at Deptford, is 
curious and interesting. 
The dough, which consists of flour and water only, is worked by a large machine .... 
It is handed over to a second workman, who slices them with a large knife for the bakers, 
of whom there are fiye. The first, or the moulder, form....;; the biscuit two at a time, the 
second, or marker, stamps and throws them to the splitter, who separates the two pieces 
and put,<; them under the hand of the chucker, the man that supplies the oven, whose 
work of thrm>ing the bread on the peel must be so exact that he canrwt look off for a 
moment. The fifth, or the d,epositor, receives the biscuits on the peel and arranges them in 
the oven. The business is to deposit in the oven seventy biscuit.<; in a minute and this is ac¥ 
complished with the regularity of a clock, the clacking of the peel, operating like the motion 
of the pendulum. 
This biscuit bakery of the British Navy at Deptford seems to have been well­
16 
known. More than thirty years later, an observer still found it worthy of detailed 
description. His account adds nothing essentially new, but does give a more pre­
cise picture of the installation which already approximates the idea of the later 
assembly line: 'The baking establishment consists of two long buildings each 
divided into two baking offices with six ovens in each, which are ranged back 
6 
1 Peter Barlow, Manufactures and Machinery irt Britain, London, 1836. 
88 