The painters around 1910, or a ferro-concrete engineer like Robert Maillart, use 
these same elements in their quest for new potentialities and new expressions;" 
One of the few hopeful signs of our time, parallel methods, appears in furniture 
too. Soon the mid-twenties will bridge the gap between the manifesto and the 
standard piece. Then, with startling speed, the diffusion begins. 
Again we limit ourselves to a type of sitting accommodation formed in this 
period: the tubular steel chair. We shall see'bow this piece, seemingly the product 
of dry mathematical invention, was worked upon by men of various countries, 
each one bringing his own distinctive contribution. 
The Shaping <if the Tubular Type 
The tubular steel chair is as truly a part of the heroic period of the new archi­
tecture as are the transparent shells of glass that replace bearing-walk The 
tubular chair also draws upon the new potentialities evolved in our period -
media that were accessible to all eyes, but that remained useless so long as their 
implications were not grasped. Behind this blindness, as we know, lay the 
split between thinking and feeling; a split that made it impossible to trauslate 
construction into emotional terms. Architecture called forth the latent poten­
tialities of iron and ferro-concrete construction, and simultaneously there was 
reborn what had been languishing for a century: a new conception of space. 
It was not otherwise in furniture. Its new creations were nurtured in the renewed 
spatial feeling. And so the interior decorator began to give way to the architect. 
The tubular chair has many antecedents. In England around 1830, as we 
noticed, iron tubes were used for beds, and various attempts were made to 
solve the ever awkward joining of horizontal and vertical tubes.' From Eng­
10 
land, experience in the welding of iron tubes came to France. Soon we find 
Parisian chairs having bent tubular legs, snch as the model of 1844, shown here 
(fig. 312). The tubes are reinforced by a core of glne or plaster. These tubular 
iron chairs were meant not for the garden but for the drawing room; a fact of 
some interest in a period so fond of showiness as was tbe Second Empire. If we 
read a water-color of the period correctly, chairs of this type stood in the Empress 
Eugenic's apartment.U Yet the ruling taste could not stand the plain material 
even attenuated by a covering of paint; and the tubular form was altogether 
discarded. 
8 
Cf. ch. 'Construction and Aesthetics: Slab and Plane' in Giedion, Space, Time, and Architecfure. 
u English patents for iron bedstead, 1827-11. Cf. our section, Mechanization and Cushion-furniture, 
p.383. 
to Charles Dupin, Les Artisans Cefkbres, Paris, 1841, pp.499-502. 
u In the CM.teau of Saint Cloud, which later burned down. 
488 