MOVEMENT 
EvER in flnx and process, reality cannot he approached directly. Reality is 
too vast, and direct means fail. Snitahle tools are needed, as in the raising of 
an obelisk. 
In technics, as in science and art, we must create the tools with which to 
dominate reality. These tools may differ. They may he shaped for mechaniza­
tion, for thought, or for the expression of feeling. But between them are inner 
bonds, methodological ties. Again and again, we shall recall these ties. 
Movement: The Classical and Medieval Attitude 
Our thinking and feeling in all their ramifications are fraught with the concept 
of movement. We owe, in large measure, our understanding of the world to 
the Greeks. From them we inherited a magnificent foundation: mathematics 
and geometry, modes of thought and expression. Yet, we have departed a long 
way from the Greeks. In many respects we have gained; in the main, we have 
lost. One of the spheres in which we have gone heyood Greece is in the compre­
hension of movement. The urge to explore movement- that is, the changing 
in all its forms - determined the channels through which flow our scientific 
thought and ultimately our emotional expression. 
If the Greeks did not find an adequate explanation of movement, if they did 
not reduce it to exact logical terms, it was not because they were incapable, but 
because of their fundamental view of the cosmos. They lived in a world of 
eternal ideas, a world of constants. In that world, they were capable of finding 
the appropriate formulation for thought and feeling. We inherited their geometry 
and their logic. Aristotle and all antiquity with him thought of the world as 
something reposing in itself, as something that had been in existence since the 
beginning of time. 
In opposition came the religious idea that the world was created and set in 
motion hy an act of will. In high Gothic times, this conception of the moved 
world yielded scientific consequences. The Scholastics rehabilitated Aristotle. 
As is well known, Aristotelian authority became so powerful in the seven­
teenth century that it ahnost succeeded in crushing the new idea of a world 
based on movement (Galileo). At the same time the Scholastics challenged 
14 