THE STANDARD AND MODULE OF THE COMPACT BATHROOM 
1ne American bath unit takes its standard from the glossy enameled tub. 
A special form of this type, the one-piece, double-shelled, built-in tub, was 
developed in America around 1920 by mass production. It can be built with 
a minimum of time and expense. This type forms not only the standard of the 
American bathroom but its backbone and module. 
The concise lines of this white hathtnb will perhaps bear witness to later 
periods for tbe outlook of ours as much as the amphora for the outlook of 
fifth-century Greece. It is a luxury article, which the combination of refined 
metallurgical and technical skills transformed into a democratic utensil. In its 
own way, this double-shell tub, which on the other side of the Atlantic still 
smacks of luxury, numbers among the symbols of our time. 
All seems so simple in this plain, undecorated type. Yet the emergence of the 
standard form from the chaos of inadequate solutions was long delayed. The 
awareness that the mechanized bathtub cannot be a plaything for the orna­
mentalist was driven home only when the method of its manufacture- cast 
iron, enamel - raised a natural veto. 
The Chaos around 1900 
To give insight into the desolate confusion that still prevailed around 1900, 
102 
we must let the expert speak his pros and cons: 
'What kind of a bathtub to use? 
'This is not an easy matter when we are told of the many different kinds and 
finishes of bathtubs in the market. . . . One of the first we had was a wooden 
box, lined with sheet lead.' Characteristics: 'Lasting hut could never be thor­
oughly cleaned.' 
'The next bathtub we find making its way into the market was the wooden 
box lined with zinc.' Characteristics: 'Looked better and bright when new, 
but its lasting qualities were not good.' 'It ahnost disappeared.' 
'Then came the wooden box lined with sheet copper.' Advantage: 'Could 
be kept looking clean for a long time.' Drawback: 'Copper ... soft and easily 
penetrated.' 'Almost lost sight of today [1896].' 
The cast-iron tub, which was later to triumph over all others, was available 
in many finishes: 'Plain cast iron painted,' usually marble-veined on the inside. 
Characteristics: 'Strong enough to last for ever, but when the paint is worn off 
it becomes rusty and unsanitary.' 
'Cast iron tubs galvanized.' Characteristics: 'This coating soon wears off.' 
' Cast iron enameled bathtub . . . a good sanitary article . . . but hard to get 
lOll J. J. Lawler, American Sanitary Plumbing, New York, 1896, pp.227-33. 
701 