carcass. We are dealing here with an organic material, ever changing, ever dif­
ferent, impossible to operate upon by revolving cutters. Hence all the essential 
operations in the mass production of dressed meat have to he performed by 
hand. For the speeding of output there was hut one solution: to eliminate loss 
of time between each operation and the next, and to reduce the energy expended 
by the worker on the manipulation of heavy carcasses. In continuous flow, 
hanging from an endlessly moving chain at twenty-four-inch intervals, they 
now move in procession past a row of standing workers ~-ach of whom ~rforms 
34 
a single operation. Here was the birth of the modern assembly line (fig. 49). 
This production line in slaughtering comes ouly in the third act, after the hog 
has been caught and killed, scalded and scraped." It begins as soon as the car­
cass, with a gambrel through its hind legs, is switched onto the overhead rail, 
where, drawn by the endless chain, it is ready to be opened, all but beheaded, 
to be disemboweled, inspected, split, and stamped. This is the sole phase of 
slaughtering in which continuous line production could be carried out. The 
killing and the cleaning could not he done in complete mechanization. Neither, 
after a sojourn in the chilling room, could the fourth phase, the final dressing 
and cutting, be mechanically performed. 
In the literal sense, Thomas Jefferson, who himself delighted in devices to 
o~n doors automatically or to convey bottles from his Monticello wine cellar, 
was right in stating that Oliver Evans' elevators and conveyors were known 
from Antiquity, from pre-Roman times. In the literal sense, too, there is nothing 
in the mechanism of the assembly line, or in the aligned workmen in the packing 
houses, that could not have been invented in Antiquity: a slaughtered pig hung 
on a moving chain and in some way aided by wheels or rollers required no new 
discovery and could equally well have been set up in one of the large Roman 
slaughterhouses. The devices themselves- influenced, it is true, by suspended 
or aerial railways- were extremely simple. What was revolutionary and what 
could not have been invented in earlier periods, in other countries, or even in 
other industries, was the way they were used to speed into mass production an 
organic material which defies handling hy purely mechanical means. 
All that remains, so far as weknow, to bear witness for the early ~riod, is a 
panoramic painting which the Cincinnati packers· sent to the Vienna Inter­
national Exhibition of 1873 (figs. 49, 109), and which, with some liberties in the 
disposition, as observed hy Harper's Magazine in September of that year," 
M- It matters little that the process here is one of disassembling, not of assembling, as in the automobile 
industry. The method of mass production which forms the common denominator is what counts. 
&> Cf. pp.228-9. 
00 
Harper's Magazine, 6 Sept, 1873, p.778. 
94 