pompous European display pieces, no more caught the eye than did the simple 
revolver of the American Samuel Colt, beside the hand-chased pistols of the 
French smiths.' A page from the catalogne of the Paris International Exposition 
2 
of 1878 tells us in what lay the American's pride at that time: perforated veneer 
' 
seats, office desks, adjustable hook supports, an automatic sofa spring-bed and 
lounge, a combined rocking chair and cradle. 
A glance over the publications of the Unitell States Patent Office shows what 
ramified subdivisions had become necessary in every category. Some 70 different 
subdivisions were added in the 'seventies solely for chairs of different purposes. 
The Patent Office in Washington is the only place where this movement can he 
surveyed. Untill926, the original models remained sheltered there. As a whole 
they offered a rare vista of American inventiveness in a most original field, and 
they seemed destined to form the nucleus of a museum of the American way of 
living. They might have stDod witness for one of the most vital periods in the 
shaping of Amerim. The prosperous 1920's, however, could spare neither room 
nor money for the further preservation of these models. They were sold as so 
many odds and ends: a hafliing lack of historical consciousness. 
That this constituent furniture of the nineteenth centnry should so far have 
passed unnoticed in histDry one can understand; it slips through the meshes 
of an approach confined to purely formal and stylistic criteria. It was created 
as the functional answer to specific problems- functional, it is true, hut the 
veritable meaning of the problems has roots deep in the fundamental nature 
and habits of man. 
Furniture and Mechanization 
How mechanization is related to the furniture of the ruling taste on the one 
hand and to patent furniture on the other should no longer be hard to explain. 
Furniture also mirrors the dual ways of mechanization we have already noticed 
in several other fields. The first, the easy way, seeks cheaper substitutes for 
handicraft work. By stamping, stenciling, turning, or other means of low-price 
production, machines could inexpensively turn out the profiling, the ornamenta­
tion, and every form of earlier periods. The mechaniml dexterity, and sometimes 
a certain ornamental bent, cannot he denied. But all in all it was a trampling 
of the same ground, incapable of creating new types. The mechanization of 
1 At least from the aesthetic point of view. The Illustrated London News of 1851 does not mention the 
Colt revolver, but describes and illustrates each ornament of these other objects, worthless today from 
any point of view whatsoever. 
2 
Official catalogue of the United States exhibitors, Exposition Universelle, Paris, 1878. 
392 