'Automatic rivet feeding heads swing into position and rivets arc shot into the 
holes waiting to receive them. Air pressure accomplishes this task.' "' The 
rivets are pressed into rows of automatic riveters with enormous jaws like the 
heads of mythical birds (fig. 63). Cleaning and painting follow. 
Something of the 1830 spirit of Johann Georg Bodmer lives on in the way 
manufacturing tools- presses, riveters, conveyor systems- are freshly invented, 
constructed, and integrated. No longer is the individual machine alone autom足
atized, as is usual in bulk manufacture. Here, extremely precise time charts 
guide the automatic co-operation of instruments which, like the atom or a 
planetary system, consist of separate units, yet gravitate about one another in 
obedience to their inherent laws. 
The Human Aspect of the Assembly Line 
It is not easy to take a historical view of recent periods, especially in so sensi足
tive and ramified an aspect as the inquest into human work. 
The assembly line and scientific management are essentially rationalizing 
measures. Tendencies in this direction extend relatively far back. But it was 
in the twentieth century that they were elaborated and became a sweeping 
influence. In the second decade (with Frederick Taylor as the central figure), 
it was scientific management that aroused the greatest attention: the interest 
of industry, the opposition of workers, puhlic discussion, and governmental 
enquiries." This is the period of its further refmement and of its joining with 
experimental psychology (Frank B. Gilbreth, central and most universal figure). 
In the third decade (Henry Ford, the central figure), the assembly line moves 
to a key position in all industry. Its scope is constantly growing. In the time of 
full mechanization, the production engineer gained sway over manufactures of 
the most diverse types, seeking every possible opening in which an assembly 
line might be inserted. The forming of a more comprehensive picture would 
well reward the effort, for the assembly line becomes almost a symbol of the 
period between the two world wars. 
Looking at the impact of mechanization on man, we must stress those aspects 
which bear upon man's very nature. We must sharply distinguish the impulse 
that gave rise to the assembly line and scientific management from the human 
repercussions. The impulse sprang from the epoch's imperious demand: pro足
duction, ever-faster production, production at any cost. As soon as evaluation 
is called for, we find often diametrically opposed views: on the one side, a dis足
gruntled worker; on the other, the enthusiastic promoter of the idea. 
70 
Ibid. 
16 
Hearings before special commitk.e of the House of Representatives W investigate Taylor's and other 
systems of Slwp Management. 3 vols. Government Printing Office, 1912. 
121 