kilograms of dust are said to have been sucked from the chairs of a single 
138 
theater .
Taking over an English model in 1905, the Germans performed experiments 
to test its efficiency."' Wet gelatine plates should allow a comparison of the 
dust that settled in ordinary heating and sweeping with that raised by the new 
vacuum cleaner. The machine is described as if iL were some newly discovered 
variety of plant life. Favorable tests notwithstanding, the hygienists concluded 
that vacumn cleaning failed to save either time or labor. 
In keeping with the general trend of household mechanization, the initiative 
then passed into American hands. The Americans support the candidacy of 
David T. Kenney, who 'installed the first mechanical cleaning system in which 
140 
the vacuum alone was used as a cleaning agent' in the Frick Building, New 
York (1902). Kenney's pioneering patent was granted hy 1903 and is said to 
have been lying in the Patent Office for years before. Here the chronological 
trail becomes rather blurred, particularly as the English inventor mentions his 
forerunners, but remains silent concerning his successful foreign contemporaries. 
We can roughly clecide as follows. America pioneered in the stationary models 
while England and France developed the early mobile ones. 
One thing is certain in all this. The American vacuum-cleaner industry ~ 
whether manufacturers of portilllle or of stationary types-· became licensees 
of the Kenney patents, the validity of which was upheld in official inquests into 
the state of the vacuum-cleaner industry. 'The Kenney patents (fig. 416) are 
the basic vacuum-cleaner patents that have been litigated and upheld by the 
141 
courts.' 
THE VACUUM BECOMF.S A HOUSEHOLD TOOL 
The circle closes some six decades after the advent of the first portable 
machines in which suction was tried out. 
In the interval it was especially the type with bellows and revolving brush 
that received most attention. We fmd it in 1917, the year a large mail-order 
firm introduced the portable electric machine. The type, one is assured, 'accom­
142 
an electric cleaner at much less cost.' 
plishes practically as much as 
138 
G. Richou, 'Netto-yage sanitaire par le vide,' La Nature, Paris, 1903, p.577. 
139 
Dr. Berghaus, 'Der Vacuumreinigcr, ein Apparat zur sUmhfreien Reinigung der \Vohnraeume,' 
Archil! fuer Hygiene, vol. 52 (Miinchen, 1905). 
ao Cooley, op.cit. p.13. 
w Report of the Federal Trade Commission on the House Furnishing Industry, 6 Oct., p.6 (Washington, 
1925). 
m Catalogue of the Montgomery Ward Co., 1917, p.703. 
589 