patented in America until the late 'sixties, at the time when attempts were hei:ng 
made to carry mechanization into every sphere of daily life. 
More than half a century was needed before the decisive step could be taken 
toward complete mechanization. This came with the introduction of the high­
speed mixer, which did not enter general usc until surprisingly late: after 1925." 
The high-speed mixer no longer attempts to imitate the various movements of 
the human hand. The agitator usuaHy consists of two arms attached to simple 
steel bars, which perform sixty to eighty revolutions a minute. 'High speed' 
refers to the greater number of revolutions, but even more to the incredible 
speed and agitation that the dough receives with each revolution, that is, the 
b'1'eat 
accelerated mixing speed. The shocks administered in this process are so 
that the more delicate European wheat cannot withstand them. High-speed 
mixers have not proved successful in Europe. 
But in America they have become one of the mainstays of full mechanization. 
This is perhaps not only because they allow accelerated production but also 
hecause they achieve a more thorough mixing and interpenetration of the ifib'1'e­
dienta, which are thrown hack and forth with incredible speed between steel arms, 
producing a dough of more uniform structure. If 'in 1925 the whole industry 
had sold itself on the desirability of the high speed mixer,' as a contemporary 
13 
has stated, the main reason seems to have been that the energetic mixing made 
possible the manufacture of a bread even whiter than before. 
The Mechanization of Baldng 
The Baker's Oven in the Handicraft Age 
The form of the baking oven has passed down almost unchanged through the 
centuries. Like the axe and the knife, it is a hasic tool of the human inventory. 
The oven developed into an egg-shaped chamber, which is excellently adapted 
to retaining and distributing heat. 
There have been exceptions, however, as in Apulia in southern Italy, where 
the haking oven assumed the shape of a domelike vault. This is said to have been 
more suitable for economic beating by manure or cow dung. But southern Italy 
is also the land of the trulli, those strangely domed straw or stone buts that 
are related to the graves of the Mycenean kings. When and how these south 
Italian structures came into being is still uncertain. 
Antoine Augustin Parmentier gives us a classic description of the stage of 
development that the oven bad reacbed in his time:' Its size varies, hut its shape 
12 
An early model of high-speed mixer appears in 1893 and a serviceable one is said to have been de~ 
veloped in 1916. Commercial use of the high-speed mixer dates from 1925-7. 
3 
1 On the occasion of an exhibition in Buffalo, 1925. 
172 