attitude: 'What his political views are I don't know and I do not care ... .',. 
The decisive point in this document is the revolt against subordination! to the 
machine. 
It is the story of an individual who, eight hours a day, year in and year out, 
must perform the same motion, and for whom the whole world is transformed 
into nuts to be turned by his wrench. The monotony and compulsion of the 
high-speed conveyor belt destroy his mental balance. ' The mechanized indi­
vidualist goes mad and proceeds t<> turn the factory into the madhouse that it 
81 
really always has been.' He loosens dangerous screws that accelerate the 
assembly line to a mad pace. In the nose of a foreman, the buttons of an office 
girl, the breasts of a fat woman, everywhere he sees nuts that have to be tightened. 
By grotesque exaggeration the human core of the problem is revealed. What is 
this automatism, this reflex movement of screw-tightening, but the observation 
which can be made every day upon the workers streaming from the factories, 
who have the machine in their very gait? 
It is the ceaseless mechanizing drive that leads Chaplin to invent the eating 
machine, which feeds the worker automatically without loss of time; he does not 
need to stop for luuch, and the assembly line goes on. 
All this, though intensified to the grotesque, has a glint of that inner truth 
which dwells in Shakespeare's comedies. 
True, the eating machine is rejected by the manager as t<>o complicated. But 
a few years later, does not reality begin to approach that symbol of eating in 
factory tempo? At luuch counters, do not endless belts carry hot plates from 
kitchen to customer? In drug stores and in the basements of 5- and 10-cent 
stores do not couuter after couuter wind like mountain paths to feed as many 
men as quickly as possible? 
The assembly line and scientific management can be put to work within 
quite opposite economic systems. Their implications, like those of mechanization 
as a whole, are not unilaterally tied to any one system. They reach into the 
depths of a basic human problem - labor- and the historical verdict will 
depend on how far one may expect the human being to become part of an 
automaton. 
Before these methods bad come into being, the Reverend William Ellery 
Channing, one of the great New England preachers of the 1830's, formulated 
8fi New Masses, 18 Feb. 1936, vol. 18, no. 6. 
7 
8 Herald Tribune, New York, 7 Feb. 1936. 
126 