motor with automatic speed-changing device. Besides the American Patents, 
104 
French and English ones also moved in this direction. 
The long line of experimentation striving from semi-automatic to fully auto­
matic laundering did not yield practical resnlts until about 1939. It is as diffi­
cult to say who invented the fust automatic washer as it is to name the inventor 
of the vacuum cleaner. Both are based on collective efforts and slow cumulative 
105 
experience. Moreover they are compounds of inventions in various fields.
Another trend comes to the fore in 1946. The agitator whose arms may still 
he a vestige of the rubbing hand is done away with. The automaton cleanses by 
virtue of a continuous and forceful penetration of the clothes by sudsy water. 
The basket does not revolve in the nsnal manner, but bounces vigorously. The 
floating clothes are patted and slapped at the rate of 600 times a minute, and 
penetrated by 'geysers' of water spurting from the bottom (fig. 404). 
This procedure, which demands a refined mechanism, goes hack to the first 
scientific approach to laundering. Energetic spurts of water, we have seen, 
were used for treating textiles in French bleacheries of the 1840's (fig. 392). 
A liquid is driven by steam pressure up a tube terminating in a conic spray so 
as to circulate evenly and continuously through the fabrics."' 
Washing, normally a rough business, is now entrusted to an automaton as 
sensitive as the radio, which receives waves from the air- if not actually more 
sensitive. As always in mechanization from the first spinning automatons 
onward, release from drudgery is paid for in highly complex machinery. 
The mechanized washing machine is as typieal and nattiral a product of 
America and full mechanization as the precision watch is of Switzerland and 
highly skilled handicraft. If any organic inter-exchange of commodities is to 
be brought about, their production will he concentrated more or less in the 
countries most suited to create them- a fact that no artificial barriers can alter. 
The automatic washing machine made its appearance on the market toward 
the end of fnll mechanization. Then began the race among competing firms 
to eliminate the draw-back of automatons, their high cost. Most manufac­
turers, however, will probably continue for some years to struggle with the 
problem of perfecting a now very intricate mechanism into a trouble-free, simple 
one, and to improve results through newer methods. A contest sponsored by 
a well-known woman's magazine reports, concerning the post-war market: 
104 French Patent 586,163, 16 Mar. 1925. British Patent 168,294, 4 June 1922. 
05 
r The claim of, among others, the Wales Reissue Patent 21,020, 28 Feb. 1939, to have been the first 
adaptation of automatic control to a si_ngle~tub washer has been sharply disputed. 
too In the 'seventies in France this method was adapted in simplified fonn to home use and is still 
popular. 
570 