records the hog-slaughtering process through all its stages, from the catching 
of the pig to the boiling out of the lard. What interests us at the moment (the 
fuller description will he found in our chapter 'Meat') is a single phase in which 
lies the genesis of the assembly line. If one defines the assembly line as a work 
method wherein the object is mechanically conveyed from operation to opera­
tion, here is indeed its origin. 
Despite careful investigation and the help of Cincinnati's local historians, no 
other pictorial evidence for the birth period of the assembly line could he found. 
It was explained, not too convincingly, that Cincinnati was at first ashamed to 
trace its wealth to pork packing. All the city's activities, its musical life for 
instance, can he accurately followed. But in tracing the first mechanization of 
the butcher's trade and the beginnings of the assembly line we have no foothold. 
Thus far we can only speculate, as if we were studying some faintly known 
epoch that has left no documents. The hypothesis is that the assembly line 
arose in Cincinnati. Devices for use in mnnection with it, patented in the late 
'sixties, stem from Cincinnatian inventors. They indicate that overhead rails 
fastened to the ceiling were not unusual at this time. 
Over forty packing-houses were operated in Cincinnati in the 'fifties. The 
city remained the center of the industry down to the Civil War, and most of the 
patents lead back to it. 
1869 
The overhead rail systems in the great slaughterhouses ultimately led to the 
conveyor system, which did not reach full development until the following cen­
tury. The track, high above head level, carries small wheeled trolleys which are 
either drawn by chains or rolled by their own weight; down an incline. Invented 
37 
hy a Cincinnatian in 1869 (fig. 50), a hog-weighing device for pork-packing 
houses shows how overhead rails- as had appeared in J. G. Bodmer's traveling 
cranes hy about 1830 -have now developed into whole railways. 'The hogs 
are transferred from drying-room to cutting-block by means of an elevated rail­
38 
way.' The inventor plainly speaks of improving equipment already current: 
'My improvement consists in providing the railway with a detachable section, 
that is connected to the weighing scale ... the hog is suspended from a carriage 
or truck which is permitted to run down an inclined portion.' 
The patent's well-thought-out overhead tracks, hoveringly suspended from 
the ceiling, betray that this is no longer a novelty. There had already heen 
experimentation along these lines. In the 'fifties the thought of building an 
M T. Morrison, Hog Weighing Apparatus, U.S. Patent No. 92,083, 29 June 1869. 
ss Ibid. 
95 