Setting aside the athletic and intellectual framework, Islam makes regenera­
tion a religious matter. Thus the hammam is regarded as complementary to 
the Mosque. Here the great ahlutions are performed." The endowment of 
hammam.s was regarded as an act of piety. The baths were open to the poor, 
payment being left to the bather's discretion. 'I leave it to the bather,' says 
20 
a caliph in the Thousand and One Nights, 'to pay according to his rank.' This 
custom was conscientiously observed to the end of the nineteenth century, for 
the gratuity given to hath attendants was considered a religious deed. And to 
promote the hammams, Islam made hath attendants tax-exempt subjects. 
As in Antiquity, the hath was a place of social intercourse. To women, it 
meant the one opportunit) to visit outside their home. 
As late as 1933, Pauly could count in Cairo some f1fty hammam.s of the twelfth, 
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries, and a few of later date. Several 
of those huilt in the twelfth century- contemporaries of the north portals at 
Chartres~··· were still in use. Since everything a1bletic had been eliminated, 
a small area and narrow frontage, !ike that of any other house on the street, 
sufficed. Only the doorway was more richly treated, drawing the eye like an 
eighteenth-century innkeeper's sign. A glance at the map of a quarter of Cairo 
shows that the hammams, each serving its immediate neighborhood, were as 
numerous as are taverns in a European city (fig. 448). In view of the warmer 
climate, this was probably more convenient than the gigantic Boman installa­
tions with their crowds drawn from afar. 
Like the thermae of the Boman Empire, hammam.s developed in all cities and 
city quarters, in villages and on highways, wherever Mohammedan influence 
reached. Lands in which fuel was very scarce hurnt straw or cow and camel 
dung, and, to the present day, refuse from the native quarters- a rather neat 
mode of garbage disposal. 
Hammam.s were to he found in the Balkans, in Persia, in Asia Minor, in Africa, 
from Egypt to Morocco, and in the Spain of the Moors. Cordova is said to 
have had about 900 haths at the peak of its development, around the year 
21 
1000. In Budapest several hot-sulphur batbs still stand today, their springs 
spanned by vaults dating hack to Turkish times. 
The most flourishing period of the Islamic hath coincides with the Bomanesque 
and Gothic in the West. The hammam attained the height of its refinement in 
the filteenth century. In other words: the Arabs had carried its organization 
to full maturity just as the Turks came upon it. 
9 
1 Ibid. p.7. 
20 Quoted ibid. p.7. 
21 Such indications are not wnfirmable; in some cases they seem to have been exaggerated. 
643 