of the thirteenth century are said to have artificially inseminated pedigree mares. 
For the hatching of eggs, the Chinese used baskets filled with warm rice and 
the Egyptians employed ovens. The American Indians hred corn with notable 
success. 
The eighteenth century opened the fielrl of genetics as it did that of mechanized 
agriculture, by scientific experiment and analysis. From the discovery Lhat plants 
are sexual organisms (Camerarius, 1694), from the analytical hybridization of 
1 
placts (Thomas Fairchild, 1717; Vilmorin Amlrieux, 1727) to the revolution­
2 
ary experiments and discoveries of Gregor Mendel (1865), interest in these ex­
periments never fell off. The late eighteenth century extended genetics to the 
artificial insemination of mammals. 
Thus the principles of genetics as such are not new. Genetics follow the 
usual path from handed-down experience to scientific experiment. The subject 
remained in this stage for a long while. What was to occur in the time of full 
mechanization is be)<md all comparison with the earlier phases. It is a far 
deeper interference with organic growth. The structural alteration of plants 
and animals proceeds at a tempo that, compared to what exis-ted before, ahnost 
eliminates the time factor. The dimensions grow to the gigantic. 
to the revolutionizing of tools and 
This revolution bears some similarity 
implements a century earlier, when they were of a sudden reshaped or trans­
formed into mechanisms. The impetuous tempo of the present development and 
the sensitiveness of the realms affected promise even more shaking consequences. 
Seed 
In the time of full mechanization, the plants that yield us food or clothing 
arc restored to prominence. By special measures, particularly those intervening 
in their fertilization, we alter their structure and productivity. Wheat, oats, 
barley, sugar-cane, cotton, fruits, and vegetables are made more hardy and more 
resistant to drought and parasites. The soy hean, although introduced early 
in the last century, assumes a new significance. But most conspicuous of all 
are the results in corn hreeding. 
'H) brid corn,' states the Bureau of Agriculture Economics, 'is as important 
3 
among plants as the tractor is among machines.' 
t J. Oppenheimer,' A Historieal Introdu~t.ion to !he Study of Tt•lPostian Development,' OR iris, Yol. 2, 
1936, pp.124--48, makes mention of the following eighteentb-ecntnry work in the field of genetics: 
1761: Koelreuter performs the artificial fertilization of plants and obtains hybrids by this means. 
1763: Jacobi reports on the fertilization of fish eggs (Hanover Magazine, 1763). 
1785: M. E. Bloch, Ichtyologie, Berlin, 1785, with chapter 'On the Manner of Hatching [Fish] Eggs.' 
2 Versuche ueber Pjlanzenhybriden, 1865. 
3 
Technology on the Farm, U.S. Govt. Printing Office, Washington, August 1940, p.21. 
247 