the skyscrapers and their sanitary equipment grew up together. The arrange­
ment of toilet, basin, and tuh along one wall is already achieved. To complete 
the compact bathroom, there remained only to turn the tuh 90° into a transversal 
position. All the fixtures are now concentrated on one wall. 
What was the layout of the bathroom in the private house? The English 
bathroom, as we have mentioned, was scaled down to suit more modest circum­
stances, its fixtures being reduced in number, hut the English layout being 
retained in its principle: loose arrangement of the flXtures. 
Consider as many houses as one will, they exhibit one regularly recurrent 
feature: the tub is free standing and runs parallel to the long wall. Around 1908 
the catalogues of the leading fums already show plans for the compact bathroom 
such as the new hotels were installing. Yet the fixtures are still distributed on 
99 
different walls (fig. 495). The cast iron, enameled tuh is still raised on feet. 
Around 1915 the domestic bathtub appears in its now familiar recessed form 
00 
(fig. 496).' But only around 1920 could the double-shelled, enameled tub he 
made in one piece and put out in mass production. Its price was thus cut by 
some 20 per cent. Soon the five-foot tuh established itself as the standard; it 
amounts to 75 per cent of the present output. The tuh became a module deter­
mining the breadth of the cell, while the basin and toilet at minimal distances 
determine the long wall. The five-foot bathroom uuit became standard. Pri­
vate dwellings preserved these dimensions set by the hotels. The larger houses 
prefer to own six or seven standard-size bathrooms rather than one or two 
bathrooms of the 1900 English type. The bathroom now serves one person, or, 
as is still most commonly the case today, interconnects two bedrooms. American 
architects criticize nothing in the European ground plans so sharply as the 
separation hy a passage of the bathroom from the bedroom. The compact 
bathroom attained its standard form around 1920. There have since heen 
attempts to fill it with all manner of furuiture and to give it the flavor of a 
living room, leading it back to the luxury standard. But these excursions need 
not he taken very serionsly. Truer to the times were the attempts, beginuing 
around 1931, to build the standard bathroom in larger units at the factory, 
thus redudng the installation costs. 'Studies showed that the bathroom-kitchen 
section of a dwelling -including foundations, floor and roof- cost 90 cents 
per cu. ft., with utilities included, as opposed to 25 cents per cu. ft. for a similar 
101 
section without these provisions.' 
99 Catalogue of the L. Wolff Mfg. Co., Chicago, Ill., 1908, p.391. 
1oo Catalogue of the Crane & Co., Chicago, Ill, 1915. 
101 
Alfred Bruce and Harold Sandbank, A HisWry of Prefabrication, John B. Pierce Foundation, Re~ 
search Study #3. New York, 1944, p.27. 
700 