Perhaps our epoch, unaccustomed to translating thought into emotional 
experience, can do no more than pose the question: Are the trajectories, as 
recorded by a production engineer, 'to eliminate needless, ill-directed, and 
ineffective motions,' in any way connected with the emotional impact of the 
signs that appear time and again in our contemporary art? Only in our period, 
so unaccustomed w assimilating processes of thought into the emotional domain, 
could serious donht arise. 
THE CREED OF PROGRESS 
ONcE more the contrast should be stressed between the ancient and the modem 
outlook. The ancients perceived the world as eternally existing and self-renew­
ing, whereas we perceive it as created and existing within temporal limits; that 
is, the world is determined toward a specific goal and purpose. Closely hound 
up with this belief that the world has a defmite purpose is the outlook of rational­
ism. Rationalism, whether retaining belief in God or not, reaches its ideological 
peak in thinkers of the latter half of the eighteenth century. Rationalism goes 
hand in hand with the idea of progress. The eighteenth century all but identified 
the advance of science with social progress and the perfectibility of man. 
In the nineteenth century the creed of progress was raised into a dogma, a 
dogma given various interpretations in the course of the century. 
In the first decades industry increasingly assmnes the prestige held by science. 
For Henri de Saint-Simon industry is the great liberator. It will sweep away 
nationalism and militarism. An army of workers will girdle the earth. The 
exploitation of man by man will disappear. The greater part of Saint-Simon's 
life was spent in the eighteenth century. His conceptious rest on uuiversal 
grounds. He sees in mechanization not what was made of it, but what it might 
become. 
Beginning with the nineteenth century, the power to see things in their totality 
becomes obscured. Yet the universalistic outlook did not fail altogether to 
live on. It would he a rewarding task to follow the survival and dying-out of 
this tendency down to the filtering of isolation into the various branches: in 
the state (nationalism); in the economy (monopolism); in mass production; in 
science (specialistic approach without heed to universal implications); in the 
sphere of feeling (loneliness of the individual and isolation of art). This much 
is certain: the universal outlook is still manifested in remnants around mid­
century. It e,an sometimes be felt in public life. The first of the world exposi­
tions at the close of the revolutionary years (London, 1851) was to be a mani­
festation of world peace and of industrial eo-operation. The closely connected 
30 