America the ideas of 1850 had long since frozen around purely technical aims. 
Thus the horizons opened by this type have remained unexplored to this day. 
THE CHAIR ADAPTED TO SPECIAI.J ZF.J) NEEDS 
The 'sixties and 'seventies move increasingly toward the construction of 
chairs for special activities. The guiding principles are the same throughout, 
whether in school furniture, photographer's posing chairs, railroad seats, or 
operating tables. The best posture for any given moment is the constant aim; 
differentiated mobility, the means. 
From these types we shall select hut a handful. 
The Sewing-Machi"" Chair: The 'seventies construct sewing-machine chairs 
(fig. 240) 'on scientific principles so as to prevent many of the diseases peculiar 
to those operating sewing machines ... .' The effort focuses on 'relieving the 
muscles of the thighs from constant contact with the front edge of the seat and 
suitably supporting the hack of the operator, thus promoting ease and comfort.' 
As the patentee does not forget to stress: 'much more labor can he accomplished 
9 
in a given time.' He relieves the sitter's thighs by 'arranging the seat of the 
chair to incline forward.' The hack rest, too, is given a forward tilt, correspond­
ing to that of the sewer's body. 
The Typewriter Chair: The Americans come to differentiate chairs for the 
writer and chairs for the typist. A typists' chair built on the rocking principle 
of the office chair would he quite unfit for typewriting. More to the point is a 
resilient hack rest that will at all times holster the trunk, allow the shoulder 
muscles to relax, and relieve the hands from exhaustion. 
The dLiferenee between the desk chair and the typewriter chair corresponds 
to the two different activities. Desk writing is a type of handicraft, with all its 
freedom and alternatives; it is not tied to any fixed posture, and much depends 
on the personal habits and preferences of the writer. Thus we may understand 
the freedom of the desk chair to oscillate, whether in leaning backward for 
occasional relaxation or when turning in this reclined position to face a visitor. 
Typewriting, like any mechanical activity, breaks down to specific move­
ments, continually repeated. Any oscillating seat is out of the question. AU 
one needs is resilient support for one's spine and the freedom to reach right or 
left. The typewriter chair therefore revolves hut does not tilt. 
The typewriter chair is a late-comer in the development. It does not appear 
before the 'nineties- that is, nearly two decades after the typewriter had 
reached its standard form, and over four decades after the office chair appeared. 
~U.S. Patent 114,532, 9 May 1871. Improvement in Sewing Machine Chairs. 
406 