Mechanization Encounters the Organic 
What happens when mechanization encounters organic substance? Here 
we face the great constants running through human development: soil, growth, 
bread, meat. 1be questions involved are hut narrow sectors of a far broader 
complex: man's relation today to those organic for<wll that act upon and within 
him. The catastrophes that threaten to destroy civilization and existence are 
but outward signs that our organism has lost its balance. Their causes lie deeply 
buried in the great anonymous movements of the epoch. Our contact with the 
organic forces within us and outside of us has been interrupted - a paralyzed, 
torn, chaotic condition. This contact is increasingly menaced as the tie with 
basic human values becomes frayed. Here, if anywhere, overturn has become 
inevitable. 
We shall therefore open with the question: What happens when mechanization 
meets an organic substance? And shall close hy inquiring into the attitude of 
our culture toward our own organism. 
MECHANIZATION OP AGRICULTURE 
After remaining stationary for a thousand years, the structure of the farmer is 
revolutionized. At first in literary and tentative ways, in the eighteenth century; 
experiraentally in the first half of the nineteenth century; sweepingly in the second 
half. England forms the bub of the movement during the eighteenth century, 
the American Middle West during the latter half of the nineteenth. Here begins 
what is perhaps a new chapter in the history of man: a changed relation to the 
soil and the uprooting of the farmer. 
Of the instruments of mechanization we shall touch only the reaper, which 
hy its replacement of the hand holds the most iraportant place among the tools 
of mechanized agriculture. 
BREAD 
What happens when mechanization comes up against an organic substance, 
bread, which, like the door lock or the farmer, belongs among the symbols of 
humanity? How did mechanization alter the structure of bread and the taste of 
the consumer? When did this mechanization set in? How are popnlar taste and 
production related to one another? 
MEAT 
What are mechanization's liraits in dealing with so complex an organism as the 
aniraal? And bow does the eliraination of a complicated craft- such as the 
butcher's- proceed? 
6 