4
By furniture--- rrwbilier - one me,ant all household movables, or 'the mov­
able articles in a dwelling bouse,' to quote the Oxford English Dictionary's source 
5 
of 1573- silverware, jewelry, tapestries, kitchen utensils, horses. 
Taking along all the furniture and everything transportable, sometimes even 
prisoners, was a custom that did not die out with the Middle Ages. When 
Francis I, King of France, traveled from Paris to Nice in the south of his reabn 
(1538), he took his household equipment with him, paying· 1200 livres for the 
6 
transportation of this 'furniture.' Traveling with one's furniture seems to 
have persisted in some instances to the end of the Ancien Regime. 
Neither did the pnissant lords of earlier times take such precaution in vain. 
The Due d'Orle,ans, arriving in Tarascon without household equipment in 1447, 
7 
had to borrow furniture from the citizenry . And so it goes, well into the seven­
teenth century. In 1649, the King's daughter slept on straw when the French 
court was forced to move at short notice. A bed was simply unobtainable.' 
The castle of the high noble stood practically empty when its lord was not 
in residence. He would leave behind only miscellaneous fittings and whatever 
could not be taken away, such as the stone windowscats, the decorations of 
walls and ceilings, or the carefully sculpted chinmey pieces. 
Underlying all this was the profound insecurity of living conditions. Every 
class of society was menaced. Fortifications and weapons formed the chief 
expenditures of town budgets. The fortified towers of the noble families of 
Bologna, or of the Tuscans of Dante's day, show that these were fortresses 
within the fortress of the city. Even behind walls life was not secure. Jacob 
Burckhardt in bL9 Civilization of the Renaissance reports impressive tales of 
assassination in the broad daylight of Perugia - all tlils toward the end of the 
fifteenth century as Perugiuo was painting his tranquil madonnas. 
This profound insecurity, both social and economic, constrained merchants 
and the feudal lords to take their possessions with them whenever they could, 
for no one knew what havoc might be loosed once the gates were closed behind 
~ Mobilier i~ still, in many countries, the legal expression for everything movable, not forming a ftx:ed 
part of the home. 
~Havard, op.cit. vol. III, col. 851, after a French inventory of 1599. 
So far as medieval furniture is concerned, what we are presenting here is hut raw material. There is no 
typological history of furniture to whi:;h one might refer as, looking backwards from mechanization, we 
seek to establish the age, the origin, and the evolution of a type. One of the few available aids is the 
research of Henri Havard, 1838--1921, a scholar who has probed widely, often tackling problems on 
which there is no other literature. But, compiled in dictionary form, his researches cannot deal with the 
interrelations of types. They are, moreover, confined to French sources. Within those limits he offers a 
broad range of -valuable material. 
6 
Ibid. col. 854. 
i !hid. col. 853. 
s !hid. col. 855. 
272 