"- uppermost. Thus even the manner of closing the door violated hahit, for one 
had to turn the key in the direction opposite to that which has become instinc­
tive. 
Each part of the lock was finally mnceived so as to he manufactured hy 
machine tools. The flat key was punched or stamped hy dies from the outset. 
The pin ttnnhlers may have heen cut by machine from the first. They were 
eventually manufactured by automatic screw machines, cut and shaped all in 
one operation. Springs were already at hand, produced by machine. Even the 
two cylinders, inner and outer, called for no manual intervention. Castings 
at first, they were later made hy machine, like all. the other romponents, 
automatically. 
Linus Yale, the younger, shaped the lock for our time. The ingenuity with 
which this was done recalls a certain stage in the development of watches when, 
in sixteenth-century Nnremherg, clocks were reduced to pocket size hy the use 
of springs. Linus Yale's transformation was even more radical. 
How did it rome ahont? His father, Linus Yale, patented a curious door 
lock in 184t (fig. 29). Its mechanism included a cylindrical ring (c in the figure), 
'said cylinder being pierced from the outer to the inner circumference with 
24 
round apertures in which are placed cylindrical pistons.' (What the elder 
Yale called 'pistons,' after the heavy pistons of the bank lock, became the 'pin 
tnmhlers' of his son.) These pistons, in the elder Yale's words, 'pass through 
said apertures and enter corresponding apertures in a revolving cylinder' (E). 
They are packed radially around the cylinder, and each piston is made in two 
separate pieces, 'said pistons being kept pressed in toward the center hy springs 
(G) attached to the frame plate of the hox.' " 
This lock, conceived from the beginning as a door lock, was derived from the 
heavy bank locks. Even in Joseph Bramah's celebrated safe lock of 1784 (fig. 30), 
26 
'the tumblers [were] packed round the cylinder of the key ... by springs.' 
The related idea of a 'revolving plate pierced with a series of holes and having 
a pin which moved the holt' as well as a 'series of springs each having a pin at 
27 
one end' was not unusual even much earlier. 
The essential elements later to be used hy Yale's son were already present 
in 1844 (fig. 29): the tumbler divided into two parts; the springs; one fixed and 
one revolving cylinder; and a key (K) without hits, acting directly to adjust 
u SpfX.ification of Linus Yale, Sr., Patent No. 3,630, 13 June 1844. 
26
lbid. 
26 Pitt-Rivers, op.eit. p.25. 
n Compare, f4>r instance, Charles Tomlinson, Rudimentary Treatile on the Construction of Locks, 
London, 1853, p.83, in which he mentions 'Stanbury's lock invented. in the United States about forty 
yearn ago.' 
70 