awareness for the continuity of phenomena, in the body as in the cosmos. Many 
of his hypotheses, such as that which would place the seat of life in 'organic 
molecules,' no longer appear as grotesque today as they did in the nineteenth 
century. 
Rene Antoine Ferchault de Reaumur (1633-1757) observes the life of insects. 
His Merrwire sur la vie des insecles was planned as a work in ten volumes, each 
running to over five hundred pages; six of these left the press between 1734 and 
17 42. He was older than both Buff on and Linnaeus, hut like them first claimed 
attention during the 'thirties. Reaumur's name is closely associated with the 
thermometer. Here again his work was one of classification, starting from two 
fixed points, the freezing point and the boiling point of water, the interval being 
divided into eighty degrees (1730). This was hut a by-product of his studies. 
It was Reaumur who recorded the insect world in all its elusive breadth. Jean­
Jacques Itousscau was an enthusiast of his studies, and Thomas Henry Huxley 
accounted him the ouly naturalist on a rank with Darwin.' Reaumur and Buffon 
possessed that gift of universal men, to he at once simple and scientifically pre­
cise.' The naturalists form the cornerstones in the rediscovery of nature. 
The Soil 
The earth, so long accepted in its complexity as something wherein one lays 
seeds and which is tilled by traditional rules, becomes an ohjeet of scientific 
inquest. Questions are raised: Whence do the plants derive their sustenance? 
Do they draw water from the earth, or 'nitrate'? Or do they suck up tiny par­
ticles of the soil? That plants live on minute fragments of earth was the belief 
of Jethro Tull, 1674-1740. On it he based his revolutionary theory of tillage: 
'Division of the parts of the soil' was the one way of increasing fertility. Dung­
ing and the rotation of crops, he held unnecessary. The first workable drill was 
invented in fulfihnent of this idea. Jethro Tull's device allowed the grain to he 
sown in perfectly straight rows between which the earth was to he tilled six 
times within the growing period. This called for his second invention, the horse­
drawn hoe.' On his own farm, Jethro Tull proved that it was possible to raise 
wheat on the same field thirteen years running. 
Tull, who was musically inclined, became heir to a small estate and studied 
at Oxford. The mechanism of the organ inspired his drill. He became a prac­
' 'I know of no one who is to he placed in the same rank with him except RlJaumur.' Quoted in Will 
Morton '\\'heeler, The Natural HU~tory of the Ants, from an unpublished manuscript in the Academy of 
Sciences !Paris] by Rene Antoine Ferchault de R&tumur, New York and London, 1926. 
s Jean Torlais, RCaumur, un esprit encyclopM.ique en dehors del' AcadCmie, Paris, 1936, gives insight into 
the many-sidedness and inventive gifts of an eightf'..enth-century scholar. 
B Critical treatment of Jethro Tull and reference to his preder,essors in T. H. Marshall,' Jethro Tull and 
the New Husbandry of the Eighteenth Century,' Economic History Review, vol.n, London, 1929, pp.41-60. 
135 