Cordova. He calls Byzantium to mind and points out that Constantinople 
with its half-million inhabitants still had over three hundred baths in operation. 
He reckons Lhat London would need a thousand. 
But how might they he fmanced? This problem always arises when human 
needs come into question in our period. How are they to he financed? As 
reformers do in every other period, Urqnhart replies: hy endowments hy the 
city, or hy the state. 
For decades, together with his campaigns for justice and righteousness, Urqu­
hart obstinately pressed the introduction of the Turkish bath, hut in vain. 
He built a simple Turkish hath in his own house in London, and another which 
he opened to the public. He always wisheAl to have the hot air at his side, and 
did not give up his custom when in later years he built a house on a spur of 
66 
Mont-Blanc. 
He was ahle to mrry out his idea on a broader scale in 1856, when Dr. Richard 
Barter, owner of the 'Irish Graefenherg,' the St. Ann's Hill water-cure estab­
lishment (fig. 464), placed 'land, workmen, materials, besides a number of 
67 
patients,' at Urquhart's disposal. Here Priessnitz's procedure was used in 
connection with the hot-air hath. 
Urquhart spoke everywhere: in English country towns and bathing resorts 
he engaged with the doctors in debates, which he later published. He lectured 
in 1862 before the celebrated Society of Arts," which had so often assisted new 
ideas. It was at this tirae that the first pnhlic Turkish hath, the 'Hammam,' 
still standing in Jermyn Street, London, was built under his supervision. It 
was a faithful reflection of his Eastern memories: 'The bathrooms have quite 
an oriental effect with the stars of stained glass sparkling in the sombre domed 
69 
tepidarium.' This installation heeame the prototype of hot-air baths both in 
Europe and in America. Exclusive hath clnhs were formed in London during 
the 'seventies. In addition to their clnh rooms they possessed a complete gym­
nasium with hot-air baths and swimming pool excellently arranged. 
Hot-air baths, also having a series of steam rooms (Turkish-Russian baths), 
played no small role during the latter half of the century, when it was still 
uncertain which type of hath would prevail and when private bathrooms were 
still a luxury. Unlike the Oriental baths, they never served the people as a 
66 
Gertrude Robinson, David Urquhart, Oxford, 1920. 
67 
Dr. Richard Barter, On the Rise and Progress of the Irish Graefenberg, London,l856, p. 15. 
ss Lecture on the Art of Constructing a Turkish Bath, London, 1862. On the Society of Arts and its role 
in the l.ondon Exhibition of 1851, cf. our chapter on the 'Mechanization of Adornment.' 
9 
G Robert Owen Allsop, The Turkish Bath, its Design and Construrtion, London, 1890, pp.IS-19. Ac~ 
cording to more recent research it would be better to call it the 'caldarium,' for the Orienta1s, as we have 
seen, allowed the tepidarium to dwindle to minor dimensions. 
670 