Perceptive men immediately sensed the temper of their day, an atmosphere 
that was to prevail throughout the century: 'We have left no imprint of our 
age either on our dwellings, on our gardens, or on anything else,' was Alfred de 
Mnsset's comment in 1836, 'we have cnlled something from every century hut 
our own ... we live off fragments.' Our interest here, however, is only in the rising 
tide of orientalism as it appeared in the pattern collections of the indnstrial-art 
trade. The rnle of the upholsterer was to reach its full extent in the 'seventies. 
The Orient, to the nineteenth century, meant at once color and adventure, 
romance and legend, and was somehow felt to reflect that wisdom of life the 
period seemed to have lost. 
Everywhere the Oriental influence appears: in countless genre paintings for 
the ruling taste; or again in the Odalisques, or reposing nudes which lngres 
painted around 1800, down to the Odalisques of Henri Matisse. It is seen in 
attempts to introduce the Turkish halb in industrial England (c.l850); in the 
Moorish-style villas; or in the borrowing of' Persian' carpet.~, genuine or machine­
made. Mechanized man in the nineteenth century yearned for an atmosphere 
other than that of his own snrroundings. In the East everyone, rich and poor 
alike, has time and leisure. In the West no one has. Western life tends toward 
strain; Eastern life toward relaxation. 
The Oriental influence must he counted as one of the many strivings for 
escape that darkened the emotional life of the last century and gave it a 
tragic note. Man was not content to live in his ow-n skin. 'This conld lead to 
nothing but the grotesque. The chambers of Lbe Orient were spacious and 
serene; their couches closely skirt the wall. Now, as these are transformed hy 
the upholsterer into cnshion furniture with springs, the divans jut forth in 
sudden and conspicuous isolation. 
As banal as the East hecame in the upholsterer's hands, the Oriental influence 
proved far more persistent than most revivals. Medievalism, hrought so lovingly 
to the fore in the Romantic era, left no lasting traces upon the dwelling. More 
influential were the several Louis revivals. Yet their role was a more superficial 
one than their recurrent popularity wonld suggest. 
The Oriental influence is often found at work beneath the surface, and not 
recognizable at first. With it may be mnnccted the latter half-century's pen­
chant for dimly lighted interiors. What this influence did to furuiture we shall 
have occasion to observe in the following pages. 
TYPES OF CUSHION FURNITURE 
France was the first country to voice the Oriental influence, and here cnshion­
fnmiture first becanJC fashionable. Thus France became. the center for the rep-
370 