No doubt mechanization can help eliminate slave labor and achieve better 
standards of living. Nevertheless, in the future it may have to he checked in 
some way so as to allow a more independent way of living. 
On the IDusion of Progress 
We are confronted with a great scrap heap of words and misused symbols and 
next to it an inunense storehouse bursting with new discoveries, inventions, and 
potentialities, all promising a better life. 
Never has mankind possessed so many instruments for abolishing slavery. But 
the promises of a better life have not been kept. All we have to show so far is a 
the world, or even to organize ourselves. 
rather disquieting inability to organize 
Future generations will perhaps designate this period as one of mechanized 
barbarism, the most repulsive barbarism of all. 
At the beginning of this century an isolated and erratic thinker, Georges Sorel, 
castigated bourgeois society as synonymous with 'les illusions du progres' 
(Paris, 1908). By 'illusions of progress' Sorel, who began as an engineer, meant 
those illusions of social life and habits of thought. He still spoke of technology 
and production methods as 'real progress.' Critics were even harder on the 
American scene, where mechanization had penetrated more deeply into everyone's 
life. Science was accused of having 'changed its base to an inputation of brute 
activity only' (Thorstein Veblen, 1906). This was too hasty and merciless a 
generalization, for simultaneously with these attacks the vanguard of science 
and art arrived at a new perception of the world, announcing the end of the age 
of rationalism. 
Thereafter the skeptical attitude toward the consequences of progress spread 
rapidly. Now, after the Second World War, it may well he that there are no 
people left, however remote, who have not lost their faith in progress. Men have 
become frig)ltened hy progress, changed from a hope to a menace. Faith in 
progress lies on the scrap heap, along with many other devaluated symbols. 
And it began so marvelously. 
715 