One is that the various specimens of the wooden-key type as it appears in 
the most diverse cultures and periods are strikingly alike. It ean he no accident 
that locks of the Faroe Isles in northern Britain (fig. 41) so resemhle locks from 
the Greek Isles or from an old Arah house on Zanzihar Island that they might 
have been manufactured in the same village. They must surely possess a common 
ancestor. They must he traceable to an archetype other than the bent metal­
key type or the so-called 'Egyptian' lock, whose bent key with its complicated 
arrangement of prongs is the product of a differentiated culture, experienced in 
the working of metals. 
The wooden-key type is found all over Asia: in China, India, in Arahia. Some 
44 
would link its diffusion to Arab raids into tropical Africa, Moorish conquerors 
hringing it to the north of that continent. On the other hand, the type has heen 
45 
retrieved in German forts dating from the Roman Empire. It has heen assumed 
that the wooden-key type was carried throughout Europe hy the westward 
marching peoples of the Great Invasions. To close the circle, it came to America 
along two ways: through German, Scottish, or Swiss settlers to Pennsylvania, 
and through Negroes to Guiana." 
Following these radiations hackwards, they converge upon one center of 
origin: the inner core of Asia; there, in the steppes, without records or history, 
was most probably the birthplace of the wooden-key type. 
One more thing also points to th.e interior of Asia. The closer one heeomes 
acquainted with the flat, wooden-key-type tnmhler lock, the more is one likely 
to conclude that it is not merely a simplification of the 'Egyptian' lock or its 
transposition into the woodworker's technique. The whole mechanism is con­
ceived in wood. Strictly avoiding curves, every part of it ean easily he shaped 
hy peasants, shepherds, or Nomads. It requires no skilled lahor, as the hent 
metal key does. The wooden-key type arose within a primitive culture and in 
a region that relied upon wood as the basic material for its hnildings, and, so 
far as possihle, for its tools. 
We conclude that the flat wooden-key type was the earlier stage; that the 
more complicated hent metal-key type was patterned from it, in keeping with 
the more highly organized Mediterranean culture. But, compared to the wooden­
key type, it never traveled very far. 
The question remains: Whence came the lock that displaced the age-old 
.w Lu.9.chan, op.cit. p.430. 
45 
L. Jacobi, Da.~ RoemerkMlell Saalburg, Homburg v. d. Hoehe, 1897, pp.462ff. But even here uncer~ 
tainty prevails: the keys of the Saalhurg fort in Germany- flat keys in bronze, probably copied from 
wooden models- might date from Augustan times or from the late third century. Whence the Homans 
might have got it is an open question, for they themselves favored skilfully fabricated rotary door locks. 
46 Luschan, op.cit. p.430. 
74 