fmgered reapers work rather on the shearing principle as later used in hair 
clippers. Grass and hair, both well rooted, are structnrally closer akin than 
stalks and timber, and can thus be dealt with by the same principle. 
Cyrus McCormick's cutting instrument consists, to the present day, of short 
triangular knives, having sma 11 cutting edges serrated with sharp ridges. They 
resemble sharks' teeth and like them are excellently suited to biting into the 
material. 
By 1783 the idea of the reaper was formulated. McCormick obtained his 
patent half a ceutnry later (1834) (fig. 79). The reaper still numbered among 
the shelved inventions. In 1354 a P!Jjladelphia chronicler to whom we owe valu­
able insight into this period reports: 'scythe and cradle continue to he the prin­
cipal instruments in use for the cutting of hay and grain in Enrope and in America. 
. . . All the attempts to introduce machinery have failed, more, it may be stated, 
from the msinclination of the public to encourage them, than from want of 
55 
merit.' Only recently had the machine come to the fore through the success 
56 
of the McCormick reaper. 
The reaper was not alone in having to await the mid-century. The full expan­
sion of industry- other than iron and textiles- dates from this time. 
C. W. Marsh, who took the next step after McCormick in perfecting the reaper, 
stresses that unusual daring was shown by the factory which in 1846 verrtnrcd 
to bnild a series of a hundred reapers (fig. 77). 
It was difficult indeed to find parties with sufficient boldness, or pluck and energy, to 
undertake the hazardou...:.; enterprise of building reapers, and quite as difficult to prevail 
upon farmers to take the chances of' cutting their grain with them, or to look favorably 
upon such an innovation. But the hundred machines made that year operated success~ 
fully ... and the advent inaugurated a revolution in the manner of cutting and harvesting 
57 
grain. 
As soon as McCormick moved West and founded his factory in Chicago the 
yearly output sharply rose. 58 The standard form had been reached, regardless 
of the many momfications later brought to it. 
The mechanical reaper was not the invention of one man. C. W. Marsh, 
drawing on his long experience, thus expresses himself: 'A practical reaper was 
no Edwin T. Freedly, Leading Parsaiis and Leading Men, Philadelphia, 1854, p.29. 
56 
Betwti',en 184.6 and 1854 over 8000 McCormick reapers were sold and used, principally in the Middle 
West. (Communicated by Herbert A. Kellar.) 
7 
~ R. L. Ardrey, American Agricultural Implements, Chicago, 1894, p.229. They were made in 'The 
Oldest Reaper Factory in the Worlrl,' that of Seymour and Morgan, Brockport, N.Y. These machines 
were built under license from McCormick. 
os In 1849, 1500 machines; in 1856, 4000; in 1874, 10,000; in 1884, the year of McCormick's death, 
80,000. 
152 