pierced by 'an injector device provided with a needle valve' much Uti the human 
skin is pierced by the doctor's hypodermic. One can, the inventor assures us, 
'provide any desired penetration.' His discourse has something of Dr. Dauglish's 
fantasy and seems worth recording for its symptomatic value. 
Another object of the invention is to provide for injecting substances such as lemon, 
orange, raisin or other flavors or flavoring extracts, colouring materials. . . . Thus bread 
may be treated with a colouring material so that it will assume the desired tint. This 
material may have any desired flavor and hence the )oaf, in addition to being coloured, 
will also have its taste fixed. . . . Similarly vitamins may he injected by volatile carriers . 
. . . For reinforcing the keeping quaHties such gases as ozone may be introduced.n; 
As the loaf becomes ever softer and frothier, there is developed the demand 
for crust of the utmost thinness and for bread that is absolutely fresh. In the 
'thirties of the past century, Sylvester Graham, the great reformer whom we 
are to meet. again presently, condemned his countrymen's l.aste for bread as it 
comes steaming from the oven. Mechanization may have fostered the wish hy 
using its skills to develop the soft airy texture that is characteristic of freshly 
baked bread. But it. is certainly not the sole cause. Such texture concurs with 
the whole process of rapid production: long before mechanization set in, Sylvester 
Graham made it clear that thin-crusted bread, made of finely milled flour, bakes 
more quickly than any other. Imperceptibly, public taste adaptcAl itself to this 
fact. Today's arbiter of taste in the bread industry indicates to bakers what he 
considers the main defects in crust: toughness, thickness, cracks. And he recom­
mends above all tenderness and uniformity." 
Extreme freshness has grown into a demand that it does not pay to disregard. 
'Storekeepers find stale bread, that is, bread that has stood for a day or even 
77 
less, unsaleahle.' To preserve its fresh-baked quality the bread is wrapped in 
·- a usage that was respected 
thick waxed paper bearing a carefully printed design 
through the paper shortage of the Second World War. The housewife, according 
to an American expert, feels the bread through the wrapper, and if it is not so 
soft and elastic that her fingers can almost meet in the middle, puts it back. 
Only thoroughly fresh bread is tDlerated in the home - a factor conducive to 
waste. This schooling in waste works more in favor of expanded production 
than to the advantage of human digestion. 
There has been no dearth of efforts to restore artificially the natural values 
removed for appearance's sake. In 1916 a large raisin firm began to advertise, 
75 
Ibid. 
rs \Vihlfahrt, op.cit. p.380. 
17 
J. S. David and W. Eldred, Siale Bread as a Problem of the Baking Indmlry, Leland Stanford Jr. 
University, Food Research Institute, Miscellaneous Publications, no. 1, p.ll. 
199 