Likewise imitative or the human hand was the 'wringing out' before rollers 
or centrifugal force were used. Such a proposal appears in the frrst washing­
machine patent of 1780 " 'In the machine over the trough are fixed two hooks, 
over which wet linen is hung, and by giving a circular movement to one of the 
hooks, presses the water out of the linen.' Ten years later, in 1790, the washing 
82 
is already laid in a 'wringing cloth of netting' which is a slit sack fastened at 
eithe,r end, to receive the wet clothes. The sack and its contents are twisted 
by means of a crank much as if it were being wrung by hand. The American 
83 
patent of 1847 (fig. 391) improves the fastenings but in other respects it follows 
in the track of the eighteenth-century types. 
THE TWO WAYS OF MECHANIZATION 
Technically eonsidered, washing machines fall into several types. Four is 
the number usually given. Whoever cares to look further will find them often 
84 
described in special literature. But methodological enquiry is more in our line 
of interest. Considered from this standpoint, two ways of mechanizing the 
laundry process have so far appeared. Both are closely bound up with the 
developments of the period. 
The frrst method is mainly of service in the larger commercial laundries. Here 
automatic operation is based on the use of steam. This method has remained 
supreme in the large-scale establishments from mid-century down to the present. 
Here too the system that has prevailed is that of the first industrially produced 
model. The model of 1851 (fig. 396) immediately proved its worth. Exploiting 
the natural circulation of steam and boiling water, it reinforces this aetion by a 
parts consist of a pair of concentric cylinders 
rotary movement. The mechanical 
of which the inner one is mobile. Fire plays beneath the outer, fixed cylinder. 
They are to be half filled. 'As soon as steam begins to escape from the boiler, 
put in sufficient soap, give the boiler a few turns ... then put in your clothes 
85 
. . . and let them stay in from 3 to 20 minutes turning the boiler occasionally.' 
In a now rare catalogue preserved by the Library of Congress, the inventor 
explains what truly takes place in the washing process with the same careful 
detail as his eoutemporaries argue the advantages of the bath. 'Dirt is a eom­
pound held tngetber and fastened to the fabric by oily glutinous or vegetable 
st British Patent No. 1269, 5 Dec. 1780. 
82 
British Patent No. 1772, 18 Aug. 1790. 
s;; U.S. Patent 5106, 8 May 1847. 
84 
Edna B. Snyder, A Study of Washing Machines, Nebraska, 1931. The types distinguished are: The 
Dolly, the Gyrator, the Cylinder, and the Vacuum. 
so U.S. Patent 8446, 21 Oct. 1851, James T. King, Washing Apparatus. 
562 