portion of the hog, other than hams, shoulders, sides and lard, that the heads, spare~ribs, 
1
neck -pieces, backbones, etc. were 'regularly thrown into the Ohio Hiver to get rid of them. a 
14 
At that time, Cincinnati processed about 40,000 hogs a year.
It is a far cry from this phase to the meat industry of today, which attempts 
to utilize all its by-products, down to the pea-sized pineal gland of the hull, 
15,000 of which produce one pound of pineal substance; or the gall-stones, which 
are shipped to Japan to he carried about by individuals as talismans or charms. 
In the early days of Cincinnati, slaughtering was conducted as a process 
distinct from packing and preserving, and the work was performed in separate 
places. Such a division still marks the European practice. 'The packing honses 
were located on the wharves or close by, for water transportation, while the 
slaughter honses were outside the settled city area. The meat for packing was 
carried through the city streets from the slaughter houses to the packing honses.' " 
Altogether different was the method of slaughtering and dressing the beasts. 
16 
As we have noticed, the traveler, as far back as the 'thirties, was struck by 
the carefully planned organization of the slaughtering. The work could he 
carried on only in the cool season, the load of an entire year descended on the 
slanghterhouses in late autumn. Masses of highly perishable products had to 
he processed with all possible haste. This led to a minute division of labor, 
step hy step, manipulation by manipulation. In much the same way in England 
at the same period the ship-biscuit bakery substituted mechanical devices wher足
ever the nature of the material allowed. All other considerations were subordi足
nated to the question: How to secure an uninterrupted production line? 
Around 1850, slaughterhouse and packinghouse were already united under 
17 
one roof. William Chambers of Edinburgh, publisher and editor of the Ency足
clopedia, acquaints ns with what was then (1354) the largest establishment in 
Cincinnati. It was four storeys high; an inclined plane led to the top of the 
hnilding. Up this path the pigs were driven, and slaughtared on the top storey. 
Thus, in the middle of the century appears the principle of teday's packing足
houses: to utilize the animal's own weight to transport it downwards from floor 
to floor by the force of gravity. 
William Chambers adds somewhat sarcastically that in England the sufferer 
is privileged to convey the news of his death to his neighbors by uttering shrill 
cries. 'In Cincinnati there is no time for this. Each hog entering the chamber 
13 
Charles Cist, quoted in C. F. Goss, Cincinnati, the Queen City, 1788-1912, Chicago, 1912, 4 vols.; 
vol. 2, p.391. 
u Goss, op.cit. vol. 2, p.33t1'. 
u; Malcolm Keir, Manufacturing, New York, 1928, p.257. 
te In the chapter 'The Assembly Line.' 
17 
Chambers, Things as They Are in America, 1851., p.l56. 
216 