257. Adjustable Chair, Chi­
cago, 1893. 'It islhe best chair 
in the wide world. It combines 
in one a Parlnr, Library, 
Srrwkin.{J and Reclining Chair, 
a Lounge or a full size bed ad­
justable to a.ny position. More 
than 80,000 now in use.' The 
mechanized reclining chair, 
although made in simple, inex­
pensive nwdels, was soon dis­
carded from the lwme. It col~ld 
not saiU;fy the values that the 
Chicago World's Fair of 1893 
enthroned for the new period. 
higher than head' posture), to a bed, and fmally, when suspended, to a child's 
crib and swing: a very paradise for this period so enamored of combinations and 
informality (fig. 256, a, b, c). 
Another continuous trend is represented in Wilson's chair; like the surfaces 
of the operating table and the barber's chair, its supporting planes are distinct 
from the base. The four legs of the regular chair have turned into two arches 
of a bridge. Between these arches of the base swing the seat, back, and foot 
panels, freely suspended on pivots. This makes for easy movability and con­
vertibility of the whole system. Sitting in the chair, one regulates the position 
from a central point as a puppeteer moves the arms and legs of his puppets. 
The 'seventies and 'eighties brought in variations and elaborations of this 
type. Often, as in the case of the Wilson chair, companies were founded to pro­
duce a single but thoroughly perfected model. As early as the start of the 'fifties, 
an English observer noted that Cincinnati factories were manufacturing chairs 
on a scale quite out of proportion to the European. Now, at the end of the 
'seventies, complicated models such as the Wilson chair were turned out in mass 
production. This is something new, for invalid chairs and operating tables had 
a more restrictsd market. The aim of the popular reclining chair was typical 
of the time: to join ample comfort with simple, inexpensive construction. A 
late model, whose sales totaled over 80,000, according to the boast of the manu­
facturer, attains simplicity and cheapness at the sacrifice of movability and 
adjustability. The year is 1893, close to the movement's end, year of the Chicago 
World's Fair, which marks the turning point (fig. 257). 
People began to look down upon this kind of furniture. It failed to voice the 
notions of wealth and splendor to which everyone now seemed born. At any rato 
it disappeared. 
422 