'B' forms the hasis of a wage system which has aroused greater hostility among 
workers than any other measure in scientific management, since it can he used 
to exploit labor with unusual severity, 
The aims have shifted. With Taylor and his successors the stress fell on 
analysis and organization of operations; with Gilbreth and the elucidation of 
human work processes by the visualization of movement, the human factor 
comes to the fore: elimination of waste motion, the reduction of fatigne, the 
training of the handicapped. With Bedaux, attention centers upon 'labor meas­
urement,' on the wage scale. It stands for a much earlier conception of business 
enterprise. The suspicion of espionage under which he came, and his inglorious 
end during the Second World War, show Bedaux's methods in an even more 
crudely materialistic light. 
The Assembly Line in the Twentieth Century 
1913-14 
This is the time when Henry Ford brings the assembly line into the limelight 
of success. The assembly line was in full stride at Ford's Highland Park plant 
by 1915, the year of F. W. Taylor's death. Two methods overlap. Henry Ford 
does not mention Taylor; he is the self-taught man, who does everything by 
himself. The results Taylor had attained by decades of perseverance have 
become common knowledge. The instruction cards on which Taylor set so much 
value Ford is able to discard. The conveyor belt, the traveling platform, the 
overhead rails and material conveyors take their place. These are automatic 
instructions that work more efficiently than Taylor's written cards. Motion 
analysis has become largely unnecessary, for the task of the assembly-line worker 
is reduced to a few manipulations. Taylor's stop watch nevertheless remains, 
measuring the time of operations to the fraction of a second. 
When the assembly line was introduced in Cincinnati and then in Chicago, 
over thirty years before Henry Ford, the stimulus arose in the mechanization 
of a manual trade, slaughtering. In this period, much experience was gathered 
regarding the speed at which the moving-line should travel and how the workers 
conducted themselves toward it. By 1900 conveyor systems were used even in 
department stores, but without affording continuous flow. 
After 1900 the machine industry lapsed into that routine which leads to a 
crippling of the creative impulse. Its experience seems to have become irrevo­
cably frozen into formulae. This is the period when experts appear with analogies, 
and argue the impossibility of all that lies beyond their routine. No one has 
115 