changeable: 'The iron work can he taken apart without disturbing the brick 
Yet this trend to»ard standardization in the kitchen remained latent, 
work.' 
as we have seen, for almost a century. 
The rational arrangement of working surfaces and the use of wall cabinets 
owe their immediate inspiration to the serving pantry. Here- we are referring 
to a pantry of 1891 (fig. 434) - the continuous counter-top, built-in wall cab­
inets with sliding doors and the built-in sink were already long-familiar things. 
Industry Enters the Field 
Slowly American industry became interested in planning and selling the 
assembled kitchen. We ean follow its progress step hy step . .By the mid-' forties 
three different industries had entered the field. 
First came the mass producers of kitchen furniture. It was natural that they 
should envisage the kitchen as an accumulation of their individual pieces. The 
kitchen cabinet was their starting point. Nonnally detached, the cabinet was 
now built in, together with a narrow broom closet, china closets, or other storage 
units. The units were standardized and capable of yielding the most diverse 
combinations. They in turn gave rise to giant, ceiling-high closets, whose sole 
aim was compression, or \\'hat the makers called 'scientific use of space in the 
178 
kitchen.' So far as we could ascertain, the first closets of this type came on 
179 
the market in 1922-3, that is, at the same tiroe as the Bauhaus at Weiroar 
was building its kitchen organized around the work process in the Haus am 
Horn (fig. 340). The pioneer firm's catalogue, 'The Standardized Uait System 
180 
for Kitchens,' shows how the units were combined (fig. 339). 
Catherine .Beecher's classical proposals of 1869 and the suggestions advanced 
by Christine Frederick, under the inspirations of scientific management around 
1912, had not yet had their effect on industry. But these combinable cupboards 
deserve our notice: They were sold as standardized units, tn be assembled as 
one wished. 
That was the first step. Next came standardized units that took the work­
process into account. American industry first ventured into the use of con­
tinuous working surfaces around 1930 (fig. 341). A continuous top connected 
m 'Standardized Unit System for Kitchens,' Catalogue of the Kitchen Maid Corporation, Andrews, 
Indiana, 1923. 
119 
In answer to our enquiry concerning the origin of their 'built-in unit' the Kitchen Maid Corpora­
tion, Andrews, Indiana, wrote (24. Nov. 19-1,3): 'These units were studied and put together between 1919 
and 1921. They were offered for sale in 1922 and at about that time were put on display at the Archi­
tect's Samples, at 101 Park Avenue, New York. Mr. E. M. Wasmuth, the Chairman of our Board of 
Directors, was the man that started this built-in unit idea, probably little thinking that it would grow 
to such an extent and be entered into by so many.' 
IS£l Kitchen Maid Corporation, Catalogue. 
614 