Two )'Cars later Heaumur published his handsome!)' engraved book, trans­
7 
lated into English the following )'ear. In the foreword, he tells amusing!)' how 
this experiment began. A friend in the diplomatic service had given him a 
precise account of incubating as practiced in the Eg)'ptian village, He soon 
knew that this was not going to be bis method. He would engage no Eg)'ptian 
experts, as princes might, His own thermometer would take the place of the 
Eg)'ptian's secret, At first he used the natural warmth of a dung heap in which 
be sank a barrel containing the incubator (fig. 130), Then he experimented with 
the baking oven of a neighboring nunnery; and fmally he built himself a wood­
heated cylindrical 'stove' affording equable radiation, Even today American 
farmers state a preference for the coal-heated cylindrical brooder rather than 
the electrical type, which, they tell us, may be inadequate in cold weather. 
One cannot read Heaurnur's book without excitement, for in this banal matter 
the observation of the great savant is powerfully projected upon the slightest 
details. He knows precisely how the chicken breaks out of its shell, bow the 
embryo forms; and he devises the 'artificial mother.' 
In a half-darkened room of a St. Louis food factory, we have seen low wire 
cages, housing chicks that had emerged from the incubator a few days earlier. 
In the brooder was an inclined rubber cloth, electrically heated. The chicks 
crawled under this cloth, which tnok the place of their mother's wings in warming 
their lungs. Now, in mid-eighteenth century, Reaurnur notes the same fact 
when he lines a box with lamb's fleece (fig. 130), inclines its ceiling like the rubber 
cloth in the twentieth-century brooder, similarly imitative of the hen's wings, 
and calls the whole device 'artificial mother.' 
Around 1944, only 15 per cent of the chicks produced in the United States 
were brooded by hens. The other 85 per cent were incubated in some 10,000 
hatcheries. In the electrically heated and thermostatically controlled incubators 
of today each unit contains some 52,000 eggs. They can be attended by one 
man. Reaumur's hatching device was immovable. The shelves of the modern 
incubators revolve on an axis, regularly changing the position of the eggs as 
the hen might, thus preventing the embryo from sticking to the shell. The 
average farm flock is of about 100 hens. Some hatcheries have a capacity of 
over a million eggs. Ten thousand chick factories produce some 1.6 billion 
chicks yearly. 
7 
Reaumur, L' Art de faire Cclore des a:ufs ei d'Clever en louie saison des oiseaux domestiques par la chaleur 
dufumier el par celle dufeu ordinaire, Paris, 1749. 
249 