Of every object exhibited, Henry Cole demanded that it should serve its 
purpose, or, as be prescribed: 'produce in each article superior utility, select 
pure forms.' From 1847 to 1848, backed by the exclusive Society of Arts, he 
organized his small but increasingly successful exhibitions. Under his influence 
the Society awakened from its decades of somnolence and again became a living 
force. In I848 he suggested to the Prince Consort Albert, president of the 
Society, that a national exhibition of British industry be held. 'The answer 
25 
was disconraging,' Cole reports, but he did not give up. The success of the 
Industrial Exhibition held in Paris in 1849 came to his rescue, and Cole pushed 
his aims even farther. Cautiously and by tactful queries in an interview at 
Buckingham Palace, he led the Prince Consort to decide that there should be held 
in London a Great Exhibition of tbe Industries of All Countries, the first truly 
26 
international one.
THE MECHANIZATION OF ADORNMENT AND THE GREAT EXHIBITION OF 1851 
As is well known, the Great Exhibition was planned by the Society of Arts, 
or rather by the driving force of Prince Consort Albert and Henry Cole, who 
steered it through obstacles and hazards that might have disconraged less 
determined men. 
The 'First Exhibition of All Nations' would allow the comparison of human 
efforts throughout the world, a gigantic balance sheet. Cole's aim was clear: 
to enact in large what his Journal of Design had urged in small: Learning to See; 
Seeing by Comparing. How was the art industry faring elsewhere? Was indus­
trial production holding its own with the handicrafts as practiced in the East? 
Cole's first speech to the public (October I849) made this point: 'We may 
expect to have at onr exhibition some of those Indian mannfactnres which are 
27 
now almost unknown to us.' 
Comparison of the European with the non-Enropean products, as Cole meant 
to show, proved damning to mechanization. Here were the serene Indian 
patterns, conceived on the two-dimensional plane; the Cashmere shawls; or 
the thin muslins, with their abstract, light blue ornament. Next to these stood 
the dazzling machine-made carpets, proudly blooming, thanks to their 30,000 
28 
cards, in all shad('-.-S and colors.
25 Henry Cole, Fifty Years of Public Work, vol. 1, p.l21. 
2
n Ibid. pp.l24,....5. n Ibid. 
U'_Matthew Digby Wyatt, The Industrial Arts of the Nineteenth Century. Illustration.~ of the choicest 
specimens of the Exhibr:tion of 1851, 2 vols., London, 1851. Here large chromolithographs show Chinese, 
African, and Indian adornment side by side with machine-made carpets (Axminster), genre statuettes 
('The First Step'), or fantastic crystal fountain made in Birmingham, and sumptuous objects such as 
state beds and overdecorated pianos. 
350 