The function of the vegetative system, which acts within our organism free of the 
interference of our will, is to maintain the 'normal atmosphere' that the cell 
requires by regulating and interrelating blood circulation, respiration, digestion, 
secretions, and body temperature, 
Its functional structure was investigated recently by the physiologist W, R. Hess 
(' Das vegetative Funktionssystem,' in Schweiz. Medizin, Jahrbuch, Basel, 1942), 
It dominates the two other nervous systems, the sympathetic and the para­
sympathetic, The sympathetic adjusts the body to the conditions of the outer 
world. It controls the external activity of the body: its physical exertions. It 
carries the blood to the muscles in action, increases the activity of the heart, 
and checks the flow of blood to organs that are not being used, 
The counterpart of tills system (the parasympathetic) regulates the inner proc­
esses, It controls the complicated adjustments going on without our conscious­
ness and continuously restores the inner equilibrium of the organs, The para­
sympathetic nervous system builds up the reserves, For instance, it carries the 
blood to the intestines, to absorb nutritive juices during the period of digestion. 
These two systems interact and are always, as Hess calls it, in 'nervous dynamic 
equilibrium.' In a wider sense they are not antagonistic, but work together to 
secure the bodily equipoise of the individual, just as in the psychlc sphere we try 
to restore the equipoise between inner and outer reality by reconciling trends 
often regarded as inmmpatible. 
History does not produce repetitive patterns. The life of a culture is limited in 
time just as is the life of an individual. Since this is true of all organic existence, 
everything depends on what is acmmplished within the allotted span. 
Neither are there fixed rules for the dominance of rational or irrational, indi­
vidual or collective, specialistic or universal conceptions. Manifold and often 
inexplicable reasons are responsible for the dominance of the oue or the other 
of these tendencies in a given period. The prevalence of ,the one or the other is 
not necessarily bad in itself. It too is bound up with the incalculable diversity 
of human existence. 
722 