The Reign of the l:pholsterer 
The Upholsterer 
TI1e upholsterer (tapissier) is a man whose concern is with fabrics and their 
arrangement. For a long time in France, the word lapissier was used in two 
senses: 'Sornetimes one means thereby a worlunan who makes carpets, some­
times a tradesman who sells or lays them,' and in the fifteenth century the 
tapissier was a man 'who hung and took down tapestry.' The statutes of his 
go back to the middle of the thirleenth century. 'Today,' continues this 
guild 
definition of 1875, 'an upholsterer is a furniture-seller who undertakes to decorate 
6 
apartments.' &
In the nineteenth century, the upholsterer becomes identical with the decorator 
who, from the days of the Empire style on, debased the cabinetmaker's craft. 
As we have seen, his peculiar function began around 1800 with profuse curlains, 
crossdraped at the windows (croisee) and banging on the walls. Later, under 
the Restoration, he also took possession of the furniture. At his hands chair 
and sofa become bulky pieces of upholstery. 
The great designer of furniture, the 'cabinetmaker,' formerly present in all 
countries, is lacking in the nineteenth century. True, the routine cabinetmakers 
included more highly skilled ones, who made imitations for the antique dealers. 
Others produced models of their own design, which a eontemporary aptly calls 
'a microcosm of all the styles of the world.' These artisans produced nothing 
of constituent value, for their skill was not imbued with creative power. One 
dominating influence is felt in the furniture and interiors of the ruling taste: 
the upholsterer increasingly controls the situation. His attention was directed 
toward a theatrical type of adornment, not to original creation. In addition to 
upholslering furniture he draped hangings and arranged the articles of mechan­
ized adornment with picturesque effect. He set up still lives in drawing rooms 
and, by the last decades of the century, he grouped figures, hehnets, vases, 
drapery, in compositions of pleasing disorder. 
The transitory currents cannot be fully surveyed. They ruled the day, together 
with parallel productions in painting and architecture. \V e cannot grasp the 
dual soul of the nineteenth century so long as we overlook the springs of feeling 
among the broad masses. Picturesque disorder fascinated people, for it was a 
reflection of the chaotic state of feeling. The upholsterer, by ernhellishmerrt of 
furniture and artistic hangings, sets up a fairyland to enchant the drabness of 
the industrial day. 
56 
L. Douet-D'Arq, 'Recueil de documents et statuts relatifs a Ia corporation des tapissiers, de 1258 
U 1879,' in Exlraits de la Biblioth.eque des Charles, Paris, 1875, tome XXXIII, p.6. 
364 