About a century and a half had to elapse before the American farmer- under 
his wide-brimmed hat- could drive his tractor in long four-cornered swathes 
around the field, and so reap his harvest. He has little more to do- beyond 
keeping watch- than to guide the steering wheel. The work requires a machine 
of manageable size, able lo perfonn in concentrated line production all the 
operations from reaping the grain to pouring it into sacks. The farmer, if need 
be, can complete his harvesting singlehanded. Otherwise it suffices for a lad 
of ten to stand on the platform and see that the sacks are being correctly filled. 
Increased production, freedom from exertion, hnman and animal, and gratifying 
work, seldom are all these so happily combined. 
A few typological remarks may help 1o situate the development in historical 
space. As soon as one has grasped the principle of all mechanization - replac­
ing, motion hy motion, the activity of the hand, the sequence becomes clear. 
We need only slate the phases of the development. 
During the second quarter of the nineteenth century, America intensively 
reshaped the tools of every trade (fig. 71). Agricultural implements also were 
given a new standard form and greater differentiation (figs. 72, 73). Quite late, 
in the 'seventies, European mnsemn directors, visiting the expositions, realized 
that 'a display of American axes could be the source of esthetic delight as strong 
14 
as an aetna! work of art.' This high standard was already reached in the second 
quarter of the century. It was immediately recognized by the specialists. The 
American axe, as it is described in the Handbook for Settlers in the United States 
(Frankfurt a.M., 1848), clearly brings out the contrast with the European 
implement, which even today retains its rigid handle and nnregnlated balance, 
hardly changed since late Gothic times: 
The axe, Lhis implement so essential to the settlers in our woods, has here (America, 
18,18] been perfected lo a high degree. Its curved cutting edge, its heavier head, 
counterbalanced hy the handle, gives the axe greater power in its swing, facilitates its 
penetration, reduces the expenditure of human energy, speeds up the work. . . . The 
handle of the axe is curved, whereby it is more easily guided and more forcibly swung 
[Kentucky axe]. 
Implement after implement was in like manner reshaped and differentiated 
for the more exacting American enviromnent. True, differentiation of the plow 
H For this and other utterances, cf. Giedion, op.cit., pp.262ff. 
147 