are chosen for experiments. By constant observation wrong or slow-working 
42 
methods are replaced by rational ones. This, Taylor says, means a division of 
labor between the management and the operatives. One labor technician in the 
planning or distributing office was often necessary for every three workers in 
the factory. 
A methodical system develops, in the beginning at least, which Taylor himself 
calls the 'military type of organization.' 'Afl you know,' he said in his Harvard 
lectures (from 1909 on), 
one of the cardinal principles of the military type of management is that every man in 
the organization shall receive his orders directly through the one superior officer who is 
over him. The general superintendent of the works transmits his orders on tickets or 
written cardboards through the various officers to the workmen in the same way that 
43 
orders through a general in command of a division are transmitted.
Taylor and his successors do not want to command only. They provide for 
departments through which the worker himself can suggest improvements and 
share in the economies. The gifteAl workers may perhaps benefit, but the average 
man cannot escape automatization. 
The luerarchy from general superintendent to worker, the soldierly discipline 
for efficiency's sake, doubtless offer industrial parallels to military life. But let 
there be no mistake: Taylorism and military activity are essentially unalike. 
The soldier indeed has to obey. But when under greatest stress, he faces tasks 
which demand personal initiative. His mechanical weapon becomes useless as 
soon as there is no moral impulse behind it. In the present situation where the 
machine is not far enough developed to perform certain operations, Taylorism 
demands of the mass of workers, not initiative hut automatization. Human 
movements become levers in the machine. 
The Factory as a.n Organism 
Taylor organized industries of the most diverse types: steel mills, arsenals, 
ferro-concrete constructions, hall-bearing works. He would have his 'funda­
mental principles of scientific management' worked out in every sphere of life, 
in 'the management of our homes, farms, of the business of our tradesmen, of 
44 
our churches, of our govermnental departments.' 
The significance of his work lies in a further increase" of mechanical efficiency. 
He is a specialist of the 1900 type: He conceives the object of his research-
42 
Compare Taylor's basic publication Slwp Management, 1903, and Principles of Scientific Manage­
ment, 1911 . 
.u F. B. Copley, op.cit. vol. 2, p.213. 
"F. W. Taylor, The Principle of Scientific Management, New York, 1911, p.8. 
99 