like a doctrine of Henry Ford?] A series of rollers should be fixed against the wall for the 
purpose of returning the boards to the first table after they have been emptied. At 
Portsmouth [England] tl1is series of rollers was kept constantly revolving by the steam 
engine, so that when the empty boards were placed upon any port of the liM they traveled 
18 
upon the mixer without further attention.
Several other fields show a like division of the production process into phases, 
as made famous by Adam Smith's account of the division of labor in a Birming­
ham needle factory. In the United States, where department stores bad slowly 
been developing since the 'forties, ready-made clothes, in contrast to Europe, 
were produced from the start. This, before the introduction of sewing machines, 
led at an early date to a division of labor by teamwork, as in the English biscuit 
manufactory. 
We shall look into one example only: the packing industry, for we shall pres­
ently meet with its later development. In Cincinnati, Ohio, where large-scale 
slaughterhouses originated, travelers as early as the 'thirties were reminded of 
Adam Smith's division of labor as they observed the slaughtering process and 
19 
its organization.
By 1837 the point seems to have heen reached where, without machinery, a 
team of 20 men could kill and clean, ready for the cutting-knife, 620 pigs in 
20 
8 honrs.
By mid-century, 'it was found economical to give each workman a special 
duty ... one cleaned out the ears; one put off the bristles and hairs, while others 
scraped the animal more carefully. . . . To show the speed attained at Cincin­
21 
nati in 1851 the workmen were able to clean three bogs per minute.' 
1839 
Beginnings of flow work in the building of intricate spinning machinery are 
discernible in England around 1840. What was taking place in America at 
this time is still largely unknown. A Swiss inventor, Johann Georg Bodmer 
(1786-1864)," equipped a machine-tool factory which both by its layout and 
by the construction of its machines was to save movement, labor, and energy 
8 
1 Peter Barlow, Manufactures and Machinery in Britain, London, 1836, p. 804. 
u Harriet Martineau, Rd,ro.~pecl of Western Travel..o;, New York, 1838, vol. 2, p.45. Quoted in R. A. 
Clemen, The American Livestock and Meat Induslry, New York, 1923. 
2o R. A. Clemen, The American Livestock and Meat Industry, New York, 1923. 
21 Ibid. p.I2l. 
2~ The rediscovery of Johann Georg Bodmer in our time is due to J, W. Roe, who in his book ETl!Jlish 
and American Too/builders, New Haven, 1916, pp.75-80, accords Bodmer the place he deserves. He bases 
his article on the Minutes of the Imtitution of Civil Engineers, London, 1868, xxvm, 573ff., which shortly 
after Bodmer's death printed a detailed memoir ending with an eight~page list of his patent£. 
90 