Forerunners, Successors? 
Charles Babbage 
Do time and motion studies have any historical forerunners? 
It was pointed out (1912)" that the early nineteenth and even the eight­
eenth century had known approaches to Taylor's method. Cited as chief witness 
\vas a disciple of Adam Smith, Charles Bahhage, professor of mathematics at 
Cambridge. His book On the Economy of Machinery and Manufacture (Cambridge, 
1832, and often reprinted) gives tables 'for the cost and time of each operation' 
in needle manufacture. Bahbage quotes the tabulation of the Frenchman Per­
ronet," who in 1760 timed by the clock and computed the cost of each operation 
in the manufacture of twelve thousand needles. 
It would be straining the truth to regard these men as precursors of Taylor's 
method, or to suppose that they anticipated it. The using of a wateh is an 
external. Babhage employs it ouly to make clear the advantages of the division 
of labor; it occurs in his chapter on that topic. 
Taylor was perfectly right in giving the simple answer: 'Time studies began 
61 
in the machine shop of the Midvale Steel Company and in 1881.' 
Bahhage's time measurements were to show the advantages inherent in the 
division of labor. The time factor in scientific management serves to reveal 
the very elements of motion. 
Charles Bedaux 
62 
Is the success of Charles Bedaux, mainly in the 1930's, to be regarded as 
a further development of scientific management? Doubtless his 'close analysis 
and systematic observation of industrial operations' were taken over from Taylor 
and especially from Gilbreth, hut the main purpose was to establish more perfect 
wage systems. Bedaux, who came to New York from France in 1911, said that 
he applied 'corrections for speed of performance.' To this end, he introduced 
a unit of human power similar to the 'dyn,' which the physicists use to measure 
mechanical work. Bedaux calls this unit a 'B.' And he defines it: 'A "B" is a 
fraction of a minute of work plus a fraction of a minute of rest always aggregat­
ing unity but varying in proportion according to the nature of strain.' " His 
n By the sulK-.ommittee on Administration of the American Society of Engineers. 
611 
Babbage, op.cit. p.l46. 
~t Copley, op.cit .. vol. l, p.226. 
"The Bedaux Company, More Production, Better Morale, A Program for Ameriean Industry, New 
York, 1942. In 1942, 720 corporations with 675,000 workers adopted the Bedaux system. 
M Charles Bedaux, Labor Management, a pamphlet, New York, 1928 (many subsequent editions). 
II4 