The group attempted to restrain the recklessness of industrial production. 
Thus, within two decades, the evil of wrongly used mechanization was recog­
nized at its roots. Cole's group of reformers included several of England's noted 
painters and sculptors. Its ideas differed from those of Ruskin, who was then 
beginning to arouse interest, and from the ideas of the Morris circle of 1860. 
1.be reformers of 1850 did not preach a return to the handicrafts. 1bey did not 
seek to escape from industry, but to cut clearly through to the core of the prob­
lem: To refute mechanization is not to cope with it. 
Machines running unchecked flooded the land. The answer of Henry Cole 
and his circle was an attempt to bridge the gaps between the artist, the manu­
facturer, and the designer. He set out to 'show the union of fine art with manu­
facture.' Hence he invented the term 'Art Manufactures.' The thought had 
come to him by 1845: 'I believe I originated in 1845 the term art manufactures, 
21 
meaning fine arts or beauty applied to mechanical production.' 
Hoping thus to strike at the root of the evil, be wanted to form and reform 
production. As he expressed it: 'An alliance between art and manufacturer 
22 
would promote public taste.' Within a few years he won over leading indus­
trialists of long standing: the famous Coalbrookd.ale Iron Works, first large­
scale iron producers and builders of the first cast-iron bridge (1775-9); the 
Wedgwood Potteries; Hollands in furniture; and Christie's in glass. 
For the furthering of his plan, Henry Cole needed a social foothold. The 
'Society of Arts' ('Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and 
Commerce' was its full name) had sponsored competitions since its foundation 
23 
by the painter William Shipley in 1754. In 1345 the Society of Arts offered a 
prize for the 'production of a tea service and beer jugs for comnwn use.' 
'Ibe award went to Felix Suromerly, the artistic and literary pseudonym of 
Henry Cole. His tea service (fig. 202) met with tremendous popularity, and 
- the Secretary of the Society tells me- is manufactured to this day by its 
original makers, Minton and Company. This tea service offers nothing unusual 
to the modern eye, but viewed ltistorimlly it commemorates the start of nine­
teenth-century reform. To Henry Cole it supplied the stimulus for new and 
far-reaching plans. 
HENRY COLE'S JOURNAL OF DESIGN, 1849-52 
Each year now, in the handsome building designed for the Society of Arts 
by the Adam brothers, Cole holds modest exhibitions of industrial products, 
21 
Cole, Fifty Years of Public Work, vol. 1, p.107. 
n Ibid. p.l03. 
~a This was the select society which, as we have seen, offered the first 'premium' for 'a machine to 
answer the purpose of reaping corn.' 
348 