made, as well, for flexibly suspending the chair by metal rods from the ceiling. 
Similar but less complex 'invalid couches' are not unusual at this time. Thomas 
19 
Webster's popular 'Encyclopedia of Domestic Economy' feels justified in de足
picting and fully describing such a couch, after a London design (fig. M4). 
A broad and comprehensive category, of which we can barely touch the surface 
here, regulates passive postures and conveniently offers the body to manipula足
tions- from shaving to surgery. At first the barber's chair, the surgeon's, 
and the dentist's are identical, just as bar her, surgeon, and dentist were gathered 
in the same person. Proposals of this type are found even in the 'sixties. 
In the mid-'fifties came those experiments so urgently striving for the demo足
cratic railroad seat, convertible without loss of space into a couch. (We shall 
deal with this in its place.) The search for the adjustable railroad seat stimu足
lates other categories of chair. 
During the 'sixties, differentiation sets in between the barber's and the dentist's 
chairs. In the dentist's chair, headrest, hack rest, and footrest become ever more 
adjustable and independent. At the same time it;, driving mechanism becomes 
20 
more complicated. By the end of the 'sixties, hydraulic pressure pumped by 
pedal levers is used to raise and lower the dentist's chair. Particular care goes 
into constructing the headrest to relieve the neck of strain. A decade later the 
21 
dentist's chair approaches its standard form (fig. 253), and the operator can 
'readily ... raise and lower the chair body without shock and jar.' 
The decade between the Paris Exhibition of 1878 and that of 1889 saw the 
problem of vaulting hy means of iron construction solved no less daringly than 
rapidly. This is the decade in which American patent furniture rises to technical 
maturity. In medicine, during the same period, the nineteenth century's specific 
talent, the technical, develops at a growing pace. Surgery becomes increasingly 
ambitious in scope, and calls for more accurately adjustable operating tables. 
One can appreciate the technical perfection required in these surgical chairs 
or tables - which categories are no longer distinguished. An inventor sets 
forth the program: 
Surgical chairs are required to be adjusted to a great variety of positions, so as to bring 
the patient to a sitting, reaching or lying poSition, to raise and lower the head or the 
feet simultaneously or independently, to tip or turn the patient to either side, and, 
generally, to secure any position necessary for convenient treatment or manipulation by 
22 
the surgeon.
19 
Thomas \Vebster, .Encyclopedia of Domestic Economy, New York, 1845. 
2o U.S. Patent 55,368, 5 June 1866. 
2t U.S. Patent 222,092, 25 Nov. 1879. 
22 
U.S. Patent 360,279, 29 Mar, 1887; lines 29-37. 'Surgical Chair,' Frank E. Case. 
409 