bed that converts into a wardrobe, the bedroom that converts into a living room, 
were more naturally and more thoughtfully suited to the two or three rooms of 
the rising middle-class than was the heavy furniture of the ruling taste. Pateut 
furniture indeed arose in the limited quarters of a gyowing urban middle class. 
But it did not stop at econom")'· of space. As soon as the human spirit seeks to 
vivify a given field, unexpected solutions are wont to appear that oitca branch 
into quite new directions: in this case, solutions for the best adaptability to 
posture. 
Posture iu the Nineteenth Century 
Improvised and informal as in the medieval period, frontal as in the Renais­
sance, relaxed as in the eighteenth century - all these postures are found again, 
reappearing like the various styles, in the furniture of the uineteenth century. 
WlJen the nineteenth century builds its heavy chairs of cylindrical cushions and 
spiral springs, it gives them the stiff upholstery and the formal aspect of seven­
teenth-century armchairs. It also used the curved and attenuated forms of the 
eighteenth century, and under Oriental influence went even further than did 
the medieval period in cultivating informality of posture. 
Almost impatiently one asks: Was the century without distinct needs of its 
own? Did it never find the key to its own character[ 
The nineteenth century did evolve a posture of its own and possibly laid the 
basis for a development that we cannot as yet perceive. But this posture can­
not he traced in the furniture of the ruling taste, whose show place was the salon. 
As so often, the uineteenth century hares its genius in its places of work, where 
it has shed all pose and dares to he self-reliant. Then it can hold its own with 
other centuries; and where one might expect it least: in the province of furniture. 
The posture e>f the nineteenth century - this too, in full contrast to the 
ruling taste -is based on relaxation. This relaxation is found in a free, unposed 
attitude that can he called neither sitting nor lying. Once again the painters 
are first to voice the unconscious inclinations of their time hy surprising and 
capturing the model in this indefinite posture. In a rippling water-color of 
1826, Richard Bouington paints his 'Reclining Woman' (fig. 233), relaxedly using 
an upholstered sofa as if it were a reclining chair. She leans lightly hack, half­
sitting, half-lying, her feet at rest on the floor. 
This posture was unfamiliar to earlier periods. When Boucher in the middle 
of the eighteenth century, and Fragonard in the second half, portray their 
beauties in carefree pose, these were sure to be nudes, studies for a 'Toilet of 
Venus' or similar subject. Cupid or a spectator stood in the picture or was nuder­
stood to he not far away. 
396 