engineering and in invention, for it was at this time that he made his discovery 
of high-speed steel. By aronnd 1900, he had developed his method of scientilic 
management. 
Taylor had already appeared in print, hnt it was not nntil 1906, some qnarter 
of a century after his first studies, that he read a paper on 'The Art of Cutting 
Metal' to a group of engineers in New York, giving hroad insight into his accom­
plislnnerrts in the field with which he was most familiar. 
The problem he deals with is the thorough analysis of a work process. Every­
thing superiluons must go, for the sake of efficiency and, as Taylor is ever stress­
ing, for the easing of labor, its ftmctional performance. 
Work should he done easily and so far as possible without fatigue. But always 
behind this lies the constant goal to which the period was magically drawn­
production, greater production at any prire. The human hody is studied to 
discover how far it can he transformed into a mechanism. 
Taylor once constructed a great steam hammer, whose parts were so finely calcu­
lated that the elasticity of its molecular forces served to heighten its efficiency. 
The steam hanuner 'was kept in its alignment by the elasticity of its parts which 
40 
yielded to the force of a hlow and returned to their former positions.' 
Similarly does he proceed in the study of human efficiency: He approaches the 
limit of elasticity. It has been frequently noted that he picked the hest workers 
for his experiments and fixed the task accordingly. The human organism is 
more complex than the steam hanuner, whose inner forces may he included in 
the reckoning. The hody retaliates, though not always in an immediately recog­
nizable manner, when worked too long near the limit of its capacity. 
Taylor's most important invention, high-speed steel, which he made in 1898 
in the Bethlehem Steel Works, also has to do with the exploration of a limit. 
When tools were run at their lop speed until they became red hot, they showed 
an 'extraordinary property of retaining what hardness they have. It turned 
out that at a certain degree of heat [over 725° Fahrenheit], they kept the sharp­
neom of cutting steel as well as their "red-hardness," the greatest improvement 
41 
taking place just before the melting point.' 
The stretching of hnman capacities and the stretching of the properties of 
steel derive from the same roots. 
Organization proceeds thus: the managers pool their experience to survey the 
field and if possible to recognize already known rules. The most capable workers 
40 
Iron Age, New York, vol. 96, p.1029. 
41 
Frank Barklay Copley, Frederick W. Taylm, Father of &ientijic MaMgemenl, New York, 1923, 
vol. 2, p.84. The term 'red-hardness' from F. W. Taylor, The Art of CuUing Metal, New York, 1906, 
p.223. 
98 