a hinged, Hat top, having a mirror inside, drawers, and a tambour-front opening 
to the right and to the left (fig. 184). In the feminine counterpart- Lady's 
Dressing Stand - the small eighteenth-century washbowl pulls out like a 
drawer to the front and the bidet to the side (fig. 185). A cistern to take the 
26 
used water is also built in.
Elegance of form, reduction to the essential, are combined with extreme mov­
27 
ability in Rudd's Table or 'Reilecting Dressing Table.' The center drawer 
'slides by itself' - and the two side drawers 'swing horizontally on a center pin' 
so that the lady may see herself from all angles. This is the same period that 
solves the complicated problems of spinning machines. 
Movability 
The Rococo contributed suppleness of form and lightness of construction. 
Movability, in which the Rococo and Lonis XVI were to some degree interested 
--from the invention of the roll-top desk and revival of the swivel chair to 
card tables and collapsible furniture- now enters the foreground. The designers 
seem to take especial pleasure in drawing their pieces with all pigeon holes, mir­
rors, fall- or tambour-fronts open, one might ahnost say, in motion. Mastery 
of form is natural to them. They do not need to stress it. They wish ouly to 
show of what their furniture is capable. 
Interest turns anew to the movable receptacle, the drawer. Its construction 
is basically improved. It slides freely on runners. Often, series of sliding shelves 
are arrayed, one above another, so that on opening the buffet or the commode 
all its contents may easily be surveyed. Secret drawers released by springs form 
a seemingly indispensable part of the desk. Drawers suspended from their top 
rim, as in Rudd's table, are also favored. Tambour-fronts made of numerous 
wooden strips (beads) glued to strong canvas are much in vogue and bnilt into 
the most diverse pieces. Jleplacing the solid cylinder top, they push back into 
much less space. 'Pullover' writing tables were a familiar article between 1780 
28 
and 1790.
Spiral springs, later bnilt into upholstered furniture, were used at an early 
date by Sheraton in a form of 'chamber horse' (fig. 224). 
This furniture, even to the manner of its representation, has direct links with 
the constituent furniture of the nineteenth century. 
26 
Sheraton gi-ves various models of night-stools and traveling bidets, which recall the Englishman's 
custom in the following century, of traveling with a portable bathtub. 
21 Hepplewhite, pl. 79. 
28 
Herbert Cescinski, English Furniture of the Eighteenth Century, 3 vols., London, 1911-12, vol. n, 
p.147. 
325 