29. The Elder Yale's Door 
Lock, Patented 1844. The 
door lock of the elder Yale rep­
resents a transition from the 
complicated bank lock Ia the 
simple mechanized door lock of 
Linus Yale Jr. Ils jour fum­
bler,<; are packed radially 
around the movable cylinder 
I/ 
pierced with holes to lake llu:m. 
Each of the tumblers (still 
A 
·~ 
called pistons) is composed of ;;; .· 
· .. p 
-
two pieces that springs (G) 
-
keep pressed toward the center. 
• 
The key, which moves the fum­
~~'0.V/ 
d 
blers outward, is cylindrical 
• 
in shape, and in many ways 
resembles Bramah's key. It 
acls on the 'pi.3tons' (D,F) 
much as Bramah' s key acted 
on his 'sliders.' 
30. JOSEPH BRAMAH'S BANK LOCK 1784. There is a close 
ref.alion between !he bank lock rd the eighleerdh century and the Yates' 
sofntions for the mechanized door lock. This appears from a dela.a of lhe 
famous C!ghleenlh-cenlury bank lock illustraied in the Edinburgh Ency­
clopedia pnbliRhed af Philadelphia. in 1832. 'In the plate f j, the whole 
1 
number of .~!iders are pressed up, or Mused to rise in their grooves, as far 
" 
a..<; !he top of the Cylinder E, by a spiral spring, coiled loosely round the 
pin. b. The first Wcks were made with a separate and independent spring 
io each slider; but it is a ver.r great improvement, the introduction of one 
common spring fo raise up the whole number.' 
The lock (invented 1784) that is connected with the name of Joseph Bramah, 
inventor of the hydraulic press became the burglar-proof lock of its period, and 
its fame lasted throughout the first half of the nineteenth century (lig. 30). 
Its principle is that of the earlier locks, but the interior arrangement is entirely 
altered. It already anticipates the bank lock in the way, for instance, that the 
tumblers are circularly packed around the key, thus solving the problem of the 
safe lock before the safe actually existed. And although Bramah's lock was at 
last picked at the great Exhibition of 1851 in London, it yielded only to hard 
work such as could not be hurriedly performed. 
It was a Mr. A. G. Hobbs of New York who won the two-hundred guineas 
the manufacturers of Bramah's lock had put up for anyone who could manage 
to pick it. Hobbs, who according to his boast 'could pick any lock in England 
in a few minutes,' had distinguished himself hy picking another famous lock 
after a brief struggle. But Bramab's lock fully occupied him for nearly a month, 
from 24 July to 23 August, when be finally succeeded. Hobbs thus proved that 
'any lock which leaves its tumblers exposed to sight or feeling through the key­
bole can be opened.' 
57 