Wealth of Nations in 1776: 'The invention of all those machines hy which lahor 
is so much facilitated and abridged seems to have been originally owing to the 
division of labor.' It need only he added that in manufacturing complex products 
such as the automobile, this division goes together with a re-assembly. 
The rationalistic approach to things came to the fore in the Renaissance. 
Complex events- the movement of bodies for instance- were dissected into 
their components and united in a resultant (parallelogram of forces). The nine­
teenth century and our century expanded to the gigantic this principle of division 
and re-assembly, until the whole factory became an organism with division and 
assembly occurring almost automatically. 
The second half of the sixteenth century, especially in Italy, saw an increase 
of technical hooks. They are practical, and offer great variety of schemes to 
raise the efficiency of manual labor or to replace it hy mechanical power. Archi­
medes screws, waterwheels, pumping machinery, and gear transmission were 
developed wnsiderahly. In hardly a point, however, did they advance beyond 
Hellenistic tintes. On thew hole their devices were incomparahly more primitive. 
They are hut spelling exercises in mechanization. And even more remarkable 
to a later period.: the mechanizing of production was not attempted. Mecha­
nization could not become a reality in an age of guilds. But social institutions 
change as soon as the orientation changes. The guilds became obsolete as soon 
as the rationalistic view became dominant and moved continually toward util­
itarian goals. This was the predestined hour for mechanization. 
Invention and the Miraculous 
Our present-day point of view tends to identify the inventive impulse with 
the mechanizing of production- an identity that cannot he taken for granted. 
The Ancients thought along altogether different lines; they placed their inven­
tive gifts in the service of the miracle. They created magical machinery and 
automatons. Admittedly, they used their mathematical and physical knowl­
edge for practical purposes too. Hero of Alexandria, whose writings are pre­
served, and whose name has heoome a sort of generic name for Hellenistic inven­
tion, built and improved oil-presses, fire-fighting pumps; invented lamps with 
automatically advancing wicks, or water-tnhe boilers for heating baths. The 
technical equipment of the later Rmnan thermae, recent excavations give reason 
to believe, originated in Egypt in the time of the Ptolemies. We shall return 
to this point when dealing with the mechanization of the bath. 
In a practical direction the sole systematic application of the Ancient's phys­
ical knowledge was to warfare. The Alexandrian inventors hnilt cannon working 
hy compressed air, with hronzen harrels bored so accurately that fire· spurted 
32 