understand its tools even if our interest here is not a t-echnical one. 1 t is not 
1 
enough for a physician to know that a body is attacked by a disease. Even if 
he is not a bacteriologist, he mnst push his research into usually invisible realms, 
he must have a modest knowledge of bacteriology, he must know when the 
organism was attacked and how the tuberculosis spread. Likewise, the his­
torian cannot dispense with the microscope. He cannot relent in tracing the 
theme to its origins. He has to show when an idea first appears; how quickly 
or slowly it spreads or disappears. He cannot confine himself to mechanization 
alone any more than the doctor can to bacteria. He must take psychic factors 
into reckoning, for often they exert a decisive influence. In our case art repre­
sents the psychic factor. It will serve as the surest aid to an understanding of 
certain phenomena. 
We begin with the concept of Movement, which underlies all mechanization. 
There follows the Hand, which is to be supplanted; and Mechanization as a 
Phenomenon. 
Mechanization of the Complicated Craft 
The elimination of the complicated handicraft marks the beginning of high 
mechanization. This transition takes place in America during the second half of 
the nineteenth century. We shall meet with it in the callings of the farmer, the 
baker, the butcher, the joiner, and the housewife. But only in one in~tance 
shall we follow it closely: in the masterful transformatior, of the door lock from 
handicraft to mechanized produetion. 
The Means of Mechanization 
The symptom of full mechanization is the assembly line, wherein the entire 
factory is consolidated into a synchronous organism. From its first appearance 
in the eighteenth century down to its later and decisive elaboration between the 
two World Wars, the assembly line is an American institution. What we shall 
have to say about it is but roughly carved out. So far as we know, no historic 
account yet covers this most significant factor in America's productive capacity. 
For this reason, hut especially because they closely touch upon human prob­
lems, the assembly line and scientific management will he given somewhat closer 
treatment. 
5 