types of articles, collars, slrirts, or towels (fig. 400). Usually one roller was 
heated and the other covered with felt. But the modern instruments' imme­
diate ancestor was the Ducoudun ironer (fig: 401), so named after its French 
inventor. The Ducoudun ironer, like the later electric models, had a 'polished, 
concave and heated metal bed and a heavy roller, fitted in a strong cast-iron 
111 
frame.' 
This mechanical aid soon heeame democratized too, and in their 1941-2 
catalogues the large mail-order firms offer it at a price ranging from $20 to $60. 
The caption reads: 'Ladies, please be seated!' (fig. 402). 
Thus ironing has become ahuost a pleasure: 'Relax, sit down, and enjoy 
ironing.' A resilient tubular chair, whose elasticity favors relaxation, is included. 
Away with the flat iron l Or, as the catalogue puts it: 
• Free yourself from back breaking drudgery.' 
The Mechanization of Cleaning: The Dishwashing Machine 
As we have mentioned, the solution for mechanical dishwashing that became 
general in the era of full mechanization was already proposed in the 'sixties. 
Ideas of various kinds had preceded it. At first the rotating blades are housed 
in a chamber separate from the things to he washed. Then an inventor places 
the agitator 'within the chamber that contains all the dishes and the washing 
112 
water.' The principle has been clearly grasped: a bladed wheel shall 'throw 
the water against the plates and other articles.' The crockery, held in wire 
racks, is situated tangentially to the whirling of the water. 
One cannot hut think of the water turbine. Indeed this is the birth time of 
the Francis turbine. James B. Francis (1815-92) based the turbine that hears 
his name on an exact insight into the laws of the flow of water. Francis, who 
started in locomotive building in England, became hydraulic engineer of Lowell, 
Massachusetts, building canals and waterworks. His first theoretical research 
into the little-known field of hydrodynamics was published in 1855. The Franeis 
turbine is still used to handle large volumes of water in low head installations. 
In the shaping of its blades and its whole construction, it is a plastic expression 
of the behavior of smoothly flowing water. 
The dish washing machine is a modest offshoot of this thinking. Here, however, 
the process is reversed, just as the motor reverses the dynamo. In the turbine 
the water is speeded through vanes to move the blades, while in the dishwasher 
111 
Laundry Management, A Ilandbookfor Use in Private and Public Laundries, 4,th ed., London, 1902, 
p.l60. Ironing machines, particularly for tailors, were patented in America during the 'fifties and 'sixties. 
Unlike other household appliancel'l of the time, these cannot be regarded as true forerunners. U.S. 
Patent 21,450, 7 Sept, 1857. Hollow cylinder with rollers, operated by a crank, U.S, Patent 72,773, 
112 
12 Mar, 1867. Hollow revolving or rotating heated iron. U.S, Patent 40,280, 13 Oct. 1863. 
576 