Problems of motion presented themselves to scientists, to production engineers, 
and to artists. Independently they found similar methods of solving them. 
Unexpectedly, we encounter the same tendency in art and in scientific manage­
ment as soon as the latter touches on absolutes and illuminates the structure of 
manual operations by penetrating the elements and the path of the motion. 
The fact that a similarity of methods can he found arising unconsciously in 
such heterogeneous fields is among the most hopeful symptoms of our period. 
This research takes a new starting point. It uses the time factor in making 
visible the elements of a motion. 'The timing ... is done on the elements of 
54 
the process.' Space-time relations form the very basis of the method: Motion 
is dissected into phases so as to reveal its inner structure. 
This characteristic is not limited to scientific management. It is deeply 
rooted in our epoch. Ahout the same time the dissection of movement appears 
quite independently as an artistic problem in painting. From the standpoint 
of motion we can distinguish a close succession of two stages in contemporary 
art. 
First, movement is dissected into separate phases so that the forms appear 
side by side or overlapping. This occurs around 1910. 
The second stage makes the form of movement into an object of expression. 
Scientific management does this for purposes of analysis. In art, calligraphic 
forms are endowed with the power of symbols. This occurs around 1920. 
The development continues into a third stage, of which we know only the 
beginning. During the 'thirties motion forms increasingly become a pictorial 
language to express psychic content. 
Movement in Successive Phases, c.l912 
The Italian Futurists attempted to represent movement in successive phases 
- Carlo Carra with his 'Rattling taxi,' Giacomo Balla with his 'Dog on the 
leash' (1912). 
The boldest handling of phase representation was Marcel Dnchamp's 'Nude 
descending the staircase' (fig. 15). The sequence of movements- which the 
eye hut summarily perceives --forms the starting point of the picture. From 
their succession, a new synthesis, a new artistic form emerges, giving representa­
tion to the heretofore unrepresentahle: movement in its phases. 
One easily recognizes in this picture the influence of the Futurists, of Archi-
&-~Frank. B. and Lillian M. Gilbreth, Motion Study for the Handicapped, London, 1920, p.7. 
106 