427. Forerunner of the Domf'.stic H.efrigerator: Ferdinand Carrl~'s Artificial Ice Machine, 1360. Ferdi­
nand Carre invented the,(ll'sl practical ice machine, and lnier inlrodnced the first hollSehold refrigerator. This is 
essentially a boiler three-qnarters filled with omrrwnia, standing in a porlaNe .~·love, and a small conic vessel 
wilh double waUs immersed in cold waf.er. When the ammonia gas liquefied by the tmrronnding wafer is 
volatilized, the heat thus absorbed callSes the waler in lhe smaller vessel fo freeze. One kilogram of ice is pro­
duced in two hours. (Louis Figuier, Les merveilles de l'industrie, Paris, n.d.) 
ing supervlSlon or maintenance. This calls for thermostatic control and lhe 
160 
sealed motor housing. We need not go into the stages of this development.
The ice machine of Ferdinand Carre, capable of producing thousands of 
pounds at a time, was a great attraction to 'isitors at the London Exhibition 
of 1862, who saw enormous blocks of ice manufactured ahnost continuously 
before their eyes. Ferdinand Carre not only built the first successful commercial 
freezing machine; he introduced in 1860 a forerunner of the household refrig­
erator (fig. 427). This 'appareil refrigerant pour !a production de Ia glace' used 
ammonia as its refrigerant. It consisted of a small portable stove acting as 
the heat-source, a boiler three-quarters filled with ammonia, a freezing vessel, 
and a reservoir. Despite its small scale, this appliance was rather complicated 
for the housewife - one hour of heating and one hour of freezing to prodnce 
a kilogram of ice - and no trnly automatic solution using a heat sonrce was 
found before the time of fnll mechanization, when the Swedes refined npon 
Carre's principle and replaced the stove by a gas flame. 
160 
Various technical works are informative on this point; cspedally so is H. B. Hull, llouselwld Refrig­
eration, Chicago, 1924, 1927, 1933 -the three editions giving precise insight into the main period of devel­
opment and vulgarization of the mechanical refrigerator. 
601 