There were rnmhinations of chairs, which the upholsterer garnished. Two 
chairs coupled on an s-plan were named a confidante. Confidantes were also made 
of three chairs, joined like the spokes of a wheel (fig. 215). There were combina­
tions for sitting face-to-face (vis-a-vis), or hack-to-hack (das-ii-dos); whence the 
petite boudeuse (fig. 216) (bouder, to sulk), a twin drawing-room chair with a 
common hack so that the sitters have their backs to one another. 'This type 
is very modern,' Havard tells us in his Dictionary, 'and is as a rule entirely 
draped.' " The hack of the petite boudeuse consists of two stacked cylindrical 
cushions with a drapery casually tossed over, while other festoons fringe its 
twofold seat. These are hut a few random examples. 
Cushion Tabourets, the Pouf. Circular Sofas, the Borne: In 1845 the poufmade 
its entrance into French salons. 'Large tabourets, cylindrical and upholstered, 
the whole trimmed with a long and thick fringe, always without visible wood­
70 
work.' The dainty tabouret, on which high nobility was once privileged to 
sit at royal levCes, is here transformed in the nineteenth-century manner, orien­
talized. A charming sight, Tbt\ophile Gautier recalls, were pretty women seated 
on poufs in a salon: like sculptures, they could be admired from every side. These 
poufs already indicate what kind of posture the nineteenth century liked. On 
the rounded cushion seats, one spontaneously assumes a changing and half­
slumped position. In the 'sixties, a low-bumped back is sometimes added (jau­
teuil hebe) (fig. 218). They become ever more squat and cushion-like. Con­
temporaries blame the upholsterer for exploiting the tahouret so playfully. 
Indeed, by 1880, it seems to have drawn closer to the birthday cake than to 
furniture (fig. 217). 
Related to the pouf is one of the period's most voluminous pieces. It filled 
the center of a salon, or stood at either end of a hallroom: the immense circular 
71 
seat or sofa, called in French borne (boundary stone). Often exceeding two 
metres in diameter, it sold in the most diverse patterns and forms: as a square, 
a polygon, segments of a circle, clover leaf, or (later the standard shape) cir­
cular. A borne, having no back rest and resembling a gigantic pouf, stood in 
72 
Napoleon III's Salle de Conseil in the Tuileries.
But the typical borne was a circular seat around an upholstered back rest in 
the shape of a truncated cone. Whether the borne in its mid-century form dates 
9 
6 Havard, op.cit. vol. I, col. 357. 
70 Ibid. vol. rv, col. 623. 
71 
'Dam lcs galerie.'l. ou dans les trCs grands salons on pla~ait un--dc ces siCge~> U chaque extrCmitk, de IU 
son nom de borne.' Jules Devi11e, Dictionnaire du Tapiiisier, Paris, 1878-80, p. :t.J. 
72 
'Salle de Conseil de Napoleon 111,' Waten.'Olor by F. D. Fournier. Collection Firmin Rnml~mx, 
reproduced in Henri Clouzot, Des Tuileries ii St. CWud, Paris, 1925. 
374 