The hath F 3 of Dura Europos (third century A.D.)," which the caliph's hath 
at Kusair' Amra, for instance, will so resemble in scale and overall plan, had 
lain buried since this Roman outpost was destroyed hy the Parthians. One of 
the things brought to light by the excavators of Dura in recent years transcends 
the archaeological report in implication. The large pool of the frigidarimn was 
found to have been filled up with sand at some time before the city fell (A.D. c.256) 
and converted into a rest hall (apodyterium) -a pattern invariably adhered 
to by the Islamic bath in all its variations. Its direct prototype is not known. 
The Dura Europos bath cannot have served as a pattern to the Omayyad caliphs. 
The similarities suggest that it represents not a special case, hut a type. This 
means that the West Roman type was relinquished in the Near East when it 
came face to face with its archetype. F. E. Brown immediately recognized 
bath F 3 as belonging to the Syrian-Oriental tradition, and Ecochard's com­
12 
parison of scales has further strengthened Brown's conclusion. 
The Syrian type, huilt of stone, normally vaulted, and technifled in the Roman 
manner, represents a crossing of the original type (which lives on in the log buts 
of Russia today) with the civilization of the West. 
From Syria and Transjordania, this type spread with the Moslem expansion 
just as the thermae had spread with Rome's. Baghdad at first, and later Cairo, 
new-hnilt by the Fatimides, become new centers of radiation. The north and 
northwest coasts of Africa and Spain up to the Pyrennean wall abundantly 
testify to the passage of the Islamic bath. After the fall of Constantinople 
(1453), the Osmans, using Byzantine modes of plan and vaulting, will carry it 
through the Balkans and Hungary to the frontiers of Austria. 
Thus the archetype of total regeneration extends continuously in its many forms 
from prehistoric times down to present-day Russia, Finland, and the Ncar East. 
Only Western culture, since the Counter-Reformation, has struck this thor­
ough-going restorative of the human organism from the roster of its institutions. 
Regeneration in Islam 
The development took a fresh turn when Islam first encountered the Homan 
thermae in Asia Minor. Islam adopted and assimilated the thermae, reshaping 
11 
F. E. Brown in Yale University, The Excavations of Dura Europos, 6th Season, edited hy M. I. 
Rostovtzeff and others, Yale, 1936, pp.49-63. Excellent bibliography on Kusair' Amra, p.58. 'The 
great frigidarium pool was filled in with sand' (p.68). Brown thus describes Bath F 3 at Dura: 'Thor~ 
oughly unclassical in the absence of organic symmetry in plan, and in the way in which its separate units 
are allowed to define themselves externally. . . . Dissimilar to the great standard symmetrical bath type, 
it suggests itself as of oriental, Syrian origin ... restricted to the far corner of the Eastern provinces 
until adapted to his purposes by the Arab conqueror.' 
12 
Michel Ecochard and Claude LeCoour, Les Bains de Damas, Institut Frangais de Damas, I partie, 
1941; II partie, 1943; II, pp.l27-8. 
636 