MECHANIZATION ENCOUNTERS THE HOUSEHOLD 
MECHANIZATION in industry meant the change from handicraft to machine 
work. But machines were not enough. They had to be integrated one with 
another, calling for organization of the work processes in the shape of the 
assembly line and scientific management. 
So it was with the mechanization of the household. America had outstripped 
all other countries in mechanizing the complicated. craft. Cooking and house­
keeping are likewise complicated crafts. And if, turning to household mecha­
nization, we ask how it has progressed and what were its defects, the United 
States again will yield us the most adequate insight, even if many impulses and 
inventions can1e from England and the Continent. 
The house and the factory are not in every way comparable. One can hardly 
opeak of household 'production.' The factory and the household have only one 
factor in common, but a crucial one. Both must improve organization and 
curtail waste labor. This is the goal to which the whole development tends 
The curtailing of household labor is achieved through the mechanization of 
work processes once performed by hand, mainly cleaning operations: laundering, 
ironing, dishwashing, carpet sweeping, furniture cleaning. To these must be 
added mechanized heating and refrigerating processes. 
Improvements in organization are achieved by closely reviewing old established 
work processes and ordering them in a more rational way. 
From what we have seen so far, it would not be strange if meebani.zation 
of the household work process carne about during the 'sixties of the last century. 
Which is indeed the case. 
The Feminist Movement and the Rational Household 
The Status of Woman 
Curtailed household drudgery and improved organization lead to greater 
independence, that ib, to the enfranchisement of the housewife and ultimately 
to the family-serviced home, the servantless household. 
The mechanization of the household had its starting point in social problems: 
the status of American women and the status of domestic servants. The Feminist 
512 