penchant for cashmere and soft carpets:' Underfoot, one feels the mellow pile of 
a Belgian carpet, thick as a lawn.' 
THE ORIENTAL INFLUENCE 
Ponderous armchairs and sofas followed in the wake of orientalizing romanti­
cism. In literature, Victor Hugo's much acclaimed poems, Les Orientales (1829), 
voiced the growing interest of the age in a legendary and dreamlike East. 
The influence took firmer root when le goat du pitl.oresque oriental was inter­
preted by the painters. At the Salon of 1831, the public spiritedly welcomed 
60 
Decamps' large canvas 'Honde de Smy rne' and his other Oriental scenes. 
They were the fruit of his travels through Asia Minor in search of picturesque 
61 
impressions (1828-9). And three years later, when Delacroix exhibite.d his 
'Femmes d'Aigerie' at the Salon of 1834, this painting, despite its austerity," 
enjoyed a no less inunediatc success. 
Delacroix's keen eye for movement was mainly attracted to tlw noble and 
serene deportment of the Berbers. He found in their relaxed poise a living ves­
tige of the ancient world. Baudelaire, one of Delacroix's earliest admirers, 
sought to convey this to contemporaries. The East is reflected in various media 
and by diverse talents. The vision of these masters was a far thing from the 
outlook of the Oriental motif seekers, and Delacroix's conception is but distantly 
related to the upholsterer's Orient. But the influence as a whole forms an integral 
part of the century. 
Oriental motifs soon made their appearance in the art industry. Two years 
after Delacroix had shown his 'Femmes d'Aigerie,' the Album Ornemaniste" 
of Aimc Chcnavard (1798-1838) was suggesting Arabian and Persian patterns 
4 
for the 'tentures' so dear to the Directoire; it also included a Persian carpet.6
Persian designs became fashionable for industrial imitation only after mid­
century. 
Oriental motifs formed but a fraction of Chenavard's Album. They marched 
amid the long procession of historical styles that France of the 'thirties was 
marshaling into readiness for the art industry. Aime Chenavard filled the 
strategic position of councilor tD the royal manufactories of porcelain and tap­
estry, Sevrcs and Beauvais. Beauvais executed several of his tapestries and 
6o Metropolitan 1\luscum, New York. 
61 Jean Alasard, L'Orienl ella peirdurc franr;aise au XIX"'' sil:cle, d'Euglme Delacroix 0: Auguste Renoir, 
Paris, 19.10, traces in detail the :;m~:e~~:-;ivc phases of the Oriental influence. 
M! This cam· a~ waH Htraip;htway pnreha!~ecl hy t.he Government.. Although neither artist repented his 
journ;~y, Dw~amps' impn·>:~ions of A;;ia Minor (la28) and Dclncroix's ffi(~morics of his vi~it to Algeria 
and Morocco in 1832 remained vivid to the end uf their lives. 
£3 Album Ornemanisle, Puris, 18:~6. 
M Ibid. p.M. Motifs Pcrsans, pl. -H; Bordures Arabes, pl. 15, 5a; Tentures, pl. 44. 
368 