These fifteenth-century tables, a transition between the demountable trestle 
table and the four-legged, framed table of today, formed the starting point for 
this enclosure. They are seen in the studies of Polyphilo and St. Jerome, where 
the massive top is permanently fixed at each end to plank supports. Whether 
they are supported by x-crossed boards, recalling their direct ancestor, the trestle, 
or hy carved slabs matters little. 
-- The habit of utilizing the space within furniture must still have run strong 
in the early sixteenth century. The hutch-tahle was widespread in the North 
50 
as in the South. These were not used as dining tmucs, but as work tahles, 
and the more elaborate ones (such as the Italian hutch-table of c.l530) (fig. 162), 
56 
termed with good reason a 'secretary,' may well have stood in some banker's 
or money-changer's office. In a writing desk from the Augustinian monastery, 
Basel (fig. 164), the table top is hinged and serves as a lid to the receptacle. 
It is a forerunner of the secretury with vertical fall front of sixteenth-century 
Italy. 
Chairs in Romanesque Time 
57 
Chairs and benches undoubtedly existed in Romanesque time. They were 
hnilt of heavy lathe-turned posts, resembling in proportion the low-turned 
pillars of early Romanesque crypts and naves, connected hy thinner turned 
members. Ecclesiastical pieces, they had nothing in common with the secular 
furniture of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The primitive plugging of 
round into round was constructively inflexible and impossible of further develop­
ment; it cannot be compared in flexibility to fifteenth-century frame c,onstruction. 
Some have sought to recognize Nordic (Norwegian and Swedish) chairs and 
benches as the domestic types used in the French or German household during 
the eleventh or twelfth centuries. 58 Yet this Nordic furniture arose in recent 
centuries, when the use of chairs had become commonplace. At best it may 
have drawn upon sacral furniture for construction and ornament. It is unlikely 
that the primitive Romanesque interior should have possessed types that were 
not usual even in the Gothic. 
55 
Thp,se hutch-tables are particularly common in Southern Cxermany, but seem also to have existed in 
sixteenth-century England. 'A table with a cupboard in it' is mentioned in the inventory of Henry VIII. 
Cf. Macquoid and Tipping, op.cit. vol. m, p.227. A German table is illustrated in A. G. Meyer, Geschichte 
der Moebelformen, Serle IV, Tafel q, fig. 10. 
06 
Percy Rathbone, 'An Early Italian Writing Table,' Bulletin of the Detroit lnsf.itule of Arts, vol. xx, 
no. 6 (March 1941), pp.63-4. 
7 
li- The surviving Kirchenbank, as it is called in the literature (ill. in Falke, op.cit.), is more probably an 
example of the Rornanesque choir stalL 
58 
Molinier, op.cit. p.S. 
296 