Theodore T. Woodruff was a wagon builder who, like so many of his con­
temporaries, designed all manner of machines: steam plows, reapers, locomotives, 
and ships' propellers. To promote his sleeping cars he formed a company of 
two million dollars' capital (1357). His cars ran successfully on many lines. 
Then, in the early 'seventies, he brought action for infringement of patent 
against Pullman, who had adopted the sideways and inclined disposition of the 
folding hed for his palace cars. The decision went in Woodruff's favor, but 
Pullman was already the stronger. 'No part of the judgement was ever collected 
and hy a strange miscarriage of justice the Pulhnan Company continued to use 
the Woodruff patents and prospered, while Woodruff's company was practically 
82 
ruined and the rightful inventor's name became almost entirely forgotten.' 
Pullman's Expansion 
A few years after his litigation with Theodore T. Woodruff, George M. Pull­
man lost his franchise over the very line on which the Pioneer had first run. 
Not even Pullman could always escape humiliation: In those merciless ye2rs, 
that man would come out on top who fought with financial power on his side. 
To Cornelius Vander hilt fell the satisfaction of opening this line to the sleeping 
cars of a company financed by himself. This was Webster Wagner's Palace 
Car Company." 
Structural resemblances link the careers of George M. Pullman and of the 
great packers, Philip Armour and Gustavus Swift. They all belonged to a genera­
tion horn in the 'thirties. They all left the eastern states for Chicago, to fmd 
there the field for unlimited enterprise. Pullman and his idea of comfort in 
travel, Swift with his successful operation of the refrigerator car, conquered the 
dimensions of the land. 
In both lived the same urge to expand in breadth as in depth: horizontally 
toward monopoly and vertically by expausion into anything that might he 
linked with their basic concern. The great meat packers processed the cattle, 
assured transportation in their own cars, created a nation-wide marketing organ­
ization, and built up industrie& to exploit the by-products. In the same way 
Pulhrran ran his cars wherever he could force an opening. He bought out every 
competitor but one, the company controlled by V anderhilt. Two years after 
Pullman's death, however, the New York Central System, on which Vanderbilt 
had run the Wagner cars, was also brought in; the Pulhnan monopoly of first­
class service was complete. Vertically, Pulhrran expanded by constantly length-
~2 Sweet, op. cit., pp.123-4. 
sa For insight into the financial manipulations involved, see the Chicago Tribune, 22 Sept. 1875, 
quoted in Edward Hungerford, Men and Iron; the History of New York Central, New York, 1938, p.274. 
462 