The camp stool, whose ancestry dates hack to the Middle Empire of Egypt, is 
one of the commonest mass-production articles of today. 
In the late Gothic, with its feeling for skilful wooden construction, these fald足
stools gained in refinement. The ribbed chairs of this period consist, as the 
name implies, of a series of thin ribs, crossed x-wise and pivotiog around a com足
mon spindle. The ribs curve quite far outwards, much farther than is useful 
for the occupant's comfort: a non-adjustment to the body characteristic of the 
Middle Ages. Between the two rows of ribs slides a hoard forming the seat, a 
surprisingly narrow one, for it is situated near the crossing of the rihs. In Hol足
bein's schoolroom of 1516, the woman whose proportions far exceed those of 
the chair (fig. 143) shows how it was used: on the narrow seat lies that panacea 
of comfort, the cushion. Where this type, termed 'Dante's chair,' originated, 
and how, we do not know. 
On Roman coios there already appear camp stools with low hacks, which are 
22 
recognized as the ancestors of the 'Dante chair.' Our earliest authenticated 
examples of the faldstool do not date further hack than the Renaissance." In 
nature and construction, the ribbed seats are late Gothic. They are ecclesiastical 
furniture, used io monasteries. 
Faldstools of the x-pattern were commonly used io Antiquity. One of Sir 
Arthur Evans's most enchanting finds in the Palace of Knossos is the 'camp 
stool room,' so named from its fresco representing youths seated on faldstools 
with cushions." 
In Antiquity one sat- as do the youths of Miooan fresco- with legs over 
the stretchers connecting the cross-pieces." This habit came from the Egyptians. 
In the Middle Ages, this everyday furniture of the Ancients - a further 
instance- was kept for persons of high rank and unfolded only on ceremonial 
occasions. Such was the crimson-painted seat that the Bishop of Salzburg pre足
26 
sented to an abbess around 1240. Her chair, with its pressed-leather seat and 
its walrus-tusk inlay, consists-of simple wooden members. 
27 
Tables of the earlier Middle Ages -were also supported hy x-crossed trestles.
From the fourteenth century we have reading desks composed of thin strips. 
Their x-shaped supports are of varying lengths, so that a hook can he held at 
the angle desired, as in a music stand of today." 
22 
Gisela Richter, The Oldest Furniture, A HU;tory of Greek Etruscan and Roman Furniture, Oxford,l926, 
p.l26. 
23 
Odom, op.cit. p.43. 
24 
Evans, The Palau of Mi1Ws at Knossos, London, 1921-35, 4 vols., vol. IV, part n, pl. xx:xr. 
25 
cr. also the siamos, illustrated in Richter, op.cit. fig. 112. 
2ll Falke and Schmitz, op.cit. 
27 
Violletrle-Duc, Dictionnaire raisortne du mobilier franr;ais de l'epoque carlovingienne ala Renaissance, 
Paris, 1855, vol. 1, p.254. as Havard, op.cit. vol. III, cols. 293-302. 
282 