The monks were vowed to ascetic conduct and ascetic living. They little heeded 
L best relax in a chair. No concern, this, 
such questions as how the body migb 
for lives based on mortification of the flesh. Throughout its time, the medieval 
interior bore the mark of its austere origins. 
In contrast to the primitive household was the raiment of its owners (fig. 144). 
The growing prosperity of the fourteenth century brought silk and brocades, 
and banquets lasting days, often consisting of six courses, each course a meal 
68 
in itself. Yet the ladies, with their costly damasse robes and long ermine­
trimmed sleeves, ate at rough trestle tables, crowded on backless benches. 
Not until the fifteenth century, and further in the sixteenth, did the bour­
geoisie draw the consequences of their new power and bring to the interior and 
its furnishings a more easy or, if one will, a more secular note. Now benches 
with back rests are seen in the rooms, and sideboards for setting out foods, and 
the late Gothic dressers on their slender square uprights. 
And yet there was a medieval comfort. But it must be sought in another di­
mension, for it cannot be measured on the material scale. The satisfaction and 
delight that were medieval comfort have their source in the configuration of 
space. Comfort is the atmosphere with which man surrounds himself and in 
which he lives. Like the medieval Kingdom of God, it is something that eludes 
the grasp of hands. Medieval comfort is the comfort of space. 
A medieval room seems finished even when it contains no furniture. It is 
never bare. Whether a cathedral, a refectory, or a burgher chamber, it lives in 
its proportions, its materials, its fonn. This sense for the dignity of space did 
not end with the Middle Ages. It lasted until nineteenth-century industrialism 
blurred the feelings. Yet no later age so emphatically renom~eed bodily comfort. 
The ascetic ways of monasticism invisibly shaped the period to its own 
image. 
One does not live for the day alone. Death is not regarded as an inescapable 
Death is bound up with life as man's steady companion. This needs 
calamity; 
no literary proof. The great cathedrals raised by the toil of surprisingly small 
communities show well enough how death, seen as the life beyond, was ever 
present in the world of the living. And the Dance of Death sequences repeat 
68 Several fourteenth-century menus have been preserved. Each course included the most diverse 
dishes and ended with a sweetmeat. These menus are from Flanders, the most productive region of 
Europe. Nevertheless their range is astonishingly varied: game and poultry of all kinds, fish, wine of 
every vintage, exotic desserts, pomegranates, almonds roasted in honey. (.T. Henry Hachez, La Cuisine a 
travers l'histoire, Brussels, 1900, pp.I38-46.) 
301 