MECHAA'IZATION AND OHGANIC SUBSTANCE: BREAD 
FooD is one of man·s most imn1ediate points of eontact with nature. 1\fan~s 
sustenance must be suited w the laws that govern his body. Our ability to 
adapt cannot stretch beyond narrow limits. When these limits are exceeded, 
our organs rebel- depending on the dosage - either immediately, or later in 
life, or, it may he, imperceptibly and in the course of generations. 
No field within the entire scope of mechanization is so sensitive to mishandling 
as that of nutrition. Here n1echanization encounters the human organism (who._.;;;e 
laws of health and disease are still ineompletely known). The step from the 
sound to the unsound is nowhere so short as in the matter of diet. 
This is not always immediately perceptible. The ultimate effects cannot 
usually be foreseen. If man deviates too long from the constant of nature, his 
taste becomes slowly vitiated and his whole organism threatened. Unwittingly, 
he impairs judgment and instinct, without which balance is so easily lost. 
The Mechanization of Kneading 
Toward the end of the handicraft era, the pharmacologist and agronomist 
Antoine Augustin Parmentier (1737-1813), who in the universal manner of his 
time combined scientific precision with a knowledge of the crafts, came to this 
definition: 'Kneading is an operation hy which the mixing together of yeast, 
flour, water, and air yields a new substance with special properties, soft, flexible 
1 
and homogeneous.' 
This kneading of dough is a strenuous activity, consisting at once of pulling, 
pushing, and beating. It was performed by hand and, for large quantities of 
dough, with the feet as well. With the advent of industrialization, the end of 
the guilds, and the expansion of cities, there arose a demand for machine knead­
ing. The mechanical kneader can produce more quickly and more hygienically. 
The beginnings reach a long way back. The Romans used rotating kneaders, 
and we have a numher of experimenls from the late Renaissance, \'dth its pen­
2 
chant for applied mechanics. All these are primitive implements, which, among 
the various phases of kneading, are restricted almost mtirely to striking. Boards 
or wooden bars attached to a crank shaft strike the dough. Elementary knead­
ing devi~es are found even in pre-industrial times. There is, for exa.'llple, the 
Castilian braga,' a large roller suspended from the ceiling, which swings hack 
1 2 
Parmentier, L'Arl du boulanger, Paris, li73, p.36l. Baker'.~ Weekly, 18 Aug. 1923. 
3 
'This device which resembles the kneading rollers used in several British seaports for biscuit~making, 
would seem to have provided the idea for the machine employed at Portsmouth and at Plymouth.' 
Cf. Augustin Rollet, Memoire sur la meunerie, la boulangerie et la conservation des grains et des farines, 
Paris, 1847, p.383. 
169 