'Elevated Railroad' over Broadway in New York was played with by engineers. 
'A. locomotive is to run on the rails and carries a suspended car which will pass 
39 
between the space of the supporting arches .. .' (fig. 48). 
The Appearance of Scientific Management 
Around 1900 
The position is clear. Competition is growing. Wage-cutting has proved 
impractical as a means of lowering production costs. The machine tools are at 
hand. They will become continually further differentiated and more specialized, 
but few real improvements seem likely to raise productivity. 
The question is narrowing down to: What can be done within the plant to 
lower costs and raise productivity? Before the turn of the century, the attention 
of industrialists was being claimed not so much by new inventions as by new 
organization. Work in factories was computed by rule of thumb. Scientific 
methods should take the place of inventions. Hence the question: How is work 
performed? The work process is investigated, as well as each movement and 
the manner of its performance. These must he known to the fraction of a 
second. 
In the last decades of the century, a number of men, often independently of 
one another, took up the problem of rationalizing operations within the factory. 
Beyond question it was the unremitting effort of Frederick Winslow Taylor 
(1856-1915) and his circle that, within a quarter of a century, laid the founda­
tions of that ever-growing field they themselves named scientifw nwnagemenl. 
By 1880, when after two years as a worker Taylor became foreman in the 
Midvale Steel Company (Philadelphia), he resolved to investigate the work 
process through time studies. He recalled one of his school teachers who had 
used a stop watch to determine how long different pupils took to finish an exer­
cise. As a youth Taylor spent several years in Europe with his family; he 
received a high school education, and served an apprenticeship as a molder and 
tool maker in a small Philadelphia factory. In 1878 he started as a worker in 
the Midvale Steel Company, where he was promoted to foreman, master, and 
engineer, until in 1389 he began reorganizing fact()ries of various types. Mean­
while he had completed. his engineering studies at night. His name was already 
known when, for three years, 1398 to 1901, he was in close collaboration with 
the Bethlehem Steel Works. This was his most fertile period, hoth in production 
39 
The Scientific American. (New York), vol. rx, Pt. t, 15 Oct. 1853. 
96 