135. Mechanical Insemina­
tion. 'Median section of the 
cow shou•ing the reproductive 
organs with nozzle of Ryrinye 
inserted into the cert•ix.' The 
syringe, allhough technically 
refined, iR still used for arli­
jJCial insemination as it was 
lYy SpaUanzani in lhelilleeight­
eenlh century. In the time of 
full mechanization, especially 
in the 1930's, the Soviet Union 
experimented extensively. Six 
million cows and ewes were 
mechanically impregnated there 
in 1936. Willwuf going so far 
in practice, the United Stales 
dem!loped a great range of 
del!ices suil,ed to the various 
species. (U.S. Department of 
Agriculture Circular 567, W. 
V. Lamhed) 
Perhaps the most appealing side of this research appears in its deeper penetra­
tion into the habits of animals and the regulation of their living conditions 
accordingly. Given the opportunity, the pig expresses the same desire for clean­
liness as the cat or man. What is surprising is the brief time needed to bring 
about a change in the breed. At Beltsville, in the space of a few years, turkey 
hens were so altered in size as to satisfy the requirements of a small family and 
fit into the modern oven. 
These examples, drawn at random from many others, indicate that the postu­
lates of experiment still waver between catering to a capricious market and 
thinking along more universal lines. 
A cloud of question marks hovers over most of the procedures. Egg production 
doubtless increases when the maternal instinct of the hen is systematically 
repressed, and the chicks are hatched and raised without her, so as not to inter­
fere with the egg-laying activity. 
A steer is doubtless easier to control when its horns have been removed by 
caustics from the first, for he has been deprived of his natural weapons of combat. 
But may not this advantage tell upon the quality in the long run? Doubtless 
there is a more careful selecting of eggs in the great hatcheries; and the small 
farmer may obtain the semen of high-pedigree bulls such as he himself could 
never afford. 
255 