They were plain, unornamented glasses conceived entirely according to function. 
One of them has a small bulge to provide a better hold. In form and execution, 
they are identical with the American drinking glasses turned out in mass produc­
tion a half-century later, and found in every bar and ten-cent store. This does 
not mean that the glasses designed by the painter served as models for the 
76 
later ones. It means that these glasses, in their functional simplicity already 
embodied the inherent trend of the period. 
Something similar occurs in the case of Rikli and the clothing he prescrihed 
for the use of his patients. The frontispiece of Rikli's Atmospheric Cure (fig. 466) 
shows the enterprising lone walker, alpenstock in hand, breathing deeply, and 
wearing his 'clothing for the walk to the air hath'- a loose, open-necked, 
porous, and short-sleeved shirt, shorts that leave the thighs exposed, sandals 
carried around the waist; he is hatless, barefoot, and bareheaded. These things 
were quite out of question in the time of parasols, high-collared and corset-like 
clothes. Shelved inventions of the 'eighties, they were the insignia of a few 
eecentries walking behind the pali'!ades of the Veldes nature park. A half­
century later replicas of the lone walker's outfit await the man in the street at 
every clothing store. 
The People's Bath in the 'Eighties: The Shower 
The nineteenth century gradually acquired hygiene. 
It learned to control diseases that had formerly run unchecked. Even the 
year 1350 in England and Wales brought its 50,000 deaths from the cholera. 
Disease-hearing matter was to he eliminated at its source hy disinfection and 
cleanliness. 
But how were the masses to he won over to cleanliness? The public baths 
that appeared in England from the 'forties on, and in France under Napoleon III, 
were appendages to the public laundries, using whatever hot water was left 
after the clothes had heen washed. But these never made much headway. The 
size of the populace was out of all proportion to the number of hatha. 
What, then, could he done? 
The axiom that sonnd finance should have the last word when it came to 
public regeneration left hut a single choice: 'cleansing stations' with shower 
baths. The helatedness with which the first acceptable scheme was proposed 
16 
They were preserved in a rather inconspicuous place in the South Kensington Museum, London. 
Even photographs were not available until the Museum was kind enough to make them so to U!iJ. 
676 