without the concurrence of the two sexes, provided we have recourse to the simple 
8 
mechanical device employed by me. 
\Yith more rigid standards, Spallanzani's experiment was soon repeated in 
England and applied by a large-scale dog breeder a century later.' 
Vii thin one generation the vast cycle was traversed from one-celled creatures 
to highly organized mammals. Since then the syringe has been technically 
refined, our knowledge of inherited characteristics and of how organs develop 
in the embryo has become vastly enlarged; hut we have not penetrated nmch 
further the problems of the generation of life and of the effects of continued 
hybridization. 
Hussia and the IJnited States have made the greatest advances in mechanical 
fertilization. Early, Russia's physiological experin:ents had bordered on the 
sensational. In 1907 a Hussian physiologist wrote on the artifidal fertilization 
10 
of mammals In the time of full mechanization, what had formerly hcen lab­
oratory experiments became tools of mass production. In the Soviet IJnion in 
1936 over 15,000 ewes were fertilized from one ram; average conception: 96.6 per 
cent. In one district all the ewes--- 45,000 --were fertilized by the semen of 
eight rams. In that year 6 million cows and ewes of the Soviet Union were 
11 
mechanically impregnated - a parallel to the introdnction of hJ' brid corn in 
America. 
In Amerim around l9t5, the introduction of artificial insemination on a large 
12 
scale \Vas slill in proccss. The apparatus is at hand and is adapted to cmvs, 
13 
sheep, goats, dogs, foxes, rahhits, poultry . Dnmmies with artificial vaginas 
and syringes for the injection of semen are ready. The immediate advantages 
and drawbacks are weighed. We do not know as yet within what limits or how 
long nature will submit to onr mechanisms. It is idle to discuss the consequences. 
At all events a most delicate point is impinged upon when generation is treated 
as a mechanical process. 
This sphere, above all others, demands that a position he taken relinquishing 
production for production's sake. In question here is not the fixed quality of 
iron or steel, of a motor or a refrigerator. It is a question of the quality of life 
8 
Di,~·serlation Rclalit~e to lhe Naluralllisloryof Animals and Vegetable.~. London, 178-1·, vol. 2, pp.l97-9. 
9 
Walter Heape, in Ho-yal Society (London) Proceedings, 1897; Hi, pp.52-63. 
10 
Elic Ivanoff, 'De la f6condation artificielle che7.les mammifhes,' Archives des &iences Biologiques, 
Leningrad, 1907, pp.377-·5I l. 
11 
W. V. Lamber1., A.rlificial Insemination in Livestock Breeding, Circular no. 567, U.S. Dept. of Agri~ 
culture, Washington, D.C., 1940, pp.2-3. 
a Ibid. p.6. 
ts Ibid. pp.2o-61. 
253 