No sooner has a new idea appeared~ the tubular chair for instance~ than 
its implications are worked out hy new creative talents, only to return to the 
inventor who resolves them into standard fonn. As in all periods, there is con足
tinual give and take, an unconscious but active collaboration. 
Yet the manner of invention is different from in the patent-furniture era. 
Invention of form now takes precedence. Inventors are no longer anonymous 
like the subscribers in the telephone directory. Their names and personalities 
are all sharply defined; and often behind an abstract form we may perceive the 
contribution of a country or of an individual. 
The Shaping of the Types 
G. Rietveld, the Precursor 
The Dutch were the first to project the new artistic vision into furniture. 
Among them G. Hietveld of L'trecht had already pointed the way before 1920. 
Rietveld did not stand alone. He was linked with the Dutch avani-garde, with 
Theo van Doesburg, with Piet Mondrian, with J. J. P. Oud, all of whom, from 
1917 on, had been voicing their esthetic in the periodical De Siijl. 'Our chairs, 
tables, cupboards ... will become the abstract-real artifacts of future interiors,' 
6 
Rietveld proclaims as he publishes his early chair designs in 1919.
As in painting and architecture, it was necessary temporarily to forget every足
thing and begin afresh, as if no chair had ever before been built. There should 
be no dovetailing. The framework of the chair is composed of square members 
simply screwed together. They cross one another but do not penetrate, and their 
overlapping distinctness is emphasized. As Hietveld puts it, the separate ele足
ments shall be 'visibly connected' (fig. 309). Line likewise crosses line in Piet 
Mondrian's colorless paintings and drawings of the same period, often called 
the 'plus and minus' pictures (fig. 310). Seat and hack in the chair of 1918 
consist of smooth, unbent plywood planes kept at a deliberate distance from 
one another. 
It is easy to see what was going on: Furniture was being dissected into its 
elements, into a system of struts and planes. The effect should be as light, as 
transparent, as hovering as possible, ahaost like an iron skeleton. 
7 
This becomes even clearer in Rietveld's buffet of 1917 (fig. 311). Here, furni足
ture resolves into vertical and horizontal elements. The dresser top, a plain board, 
tiDe Stijl, Jahrg. 2, Leyden, 1918-19, no. 11. 
7 Reproduced in 10 Jaaren Stijl, Jubilee series, 1927, p.47. 
485 