the factory- as a closed organism, as a goal in itself. What is manufactured 
in it and for what purpose are questions beyond his scope. 
He owned shares in factories, received income from patents and his organizing 
work, but he seems never to have been tempted to become a hig businessman 
himself. Taylor was eminently at home in the practical world. But by virtue 
of his analytical talent, his was one of those laboratory minds hound to the 
hardships and delights of research. By 1901, already having earned what he 
judged sufficient for his needs, he retired to devote himself wholly to his 
investigations. 
Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, hy the exceeding penetration of his 
diagnostic and therapeutic methods, opened new access to the structure of the 
psyche. That F. W. Taylor was horn in the same year as Freud, 1856, is of course 
coincidental. But a conunon trait of the scientific and artistic groups around 
the tum of the century was to employ an unprecedented sharpness of analysis 
in revealing the inside of processes." 
Space-Time Studies in Scientific Management 
By the weight of all his energy Frederick Taylor opened the way for further 
elaboration of his method. Refinements soon appeared. There followed an 
alliance between scientific management and experimental psychology. Inde足
pendently of scientific management, psychology had already devised tests to 
determine the person best suited to certain occupations. The basis of these 
tests was the time taken to react to a given impression. These techniques had 
been developed in psychological lahoratories. Hugo Muensterherg, German 
psychologist who taught at Harvard, was among the first to survey the results 
of scientific management, then (1912) coming into its own, and to point out 
46 
that from the psychological standpoint it was still reckouing by rule of thumb.
Testing was also experimented with in America- Stephen Calvin on school足
work. 
Scientific management's approaching of psychology was connected "ith the 
giving up of Taylor's stop-watch methods. Frank B. Gilhreth (1868-1924) 
and his wife, the psychologist Lillian M. Gilbreth, often in collaboration, devel足
oped methods which led to a visual representation of the work process. Gilbreth 
~s Freud published his studies on hysteria at the same time (1895) as Taylor was delivering his first 
lectures to Ameriean engineers. 
46 Hugo Muensterberg, Psychology and Industrial Development, Boston, 1913. This book was impor足
tant also for Muensterberg's experiments for the improvement of electric railway and telephone service, 
the examination of ship's offioors not able to meet emergencies, and for his research in the field, much 
further developed since, of advertising, display, and saloomansbip. 
100 