capital. Besides the great depots (Portland, Maine, and Boston) ... almost every I<Jwn 
has its local companies to supply what has long since ceased to be a luxury, and has become 
154 
a necessity in almost every family.
This is well confirmed hy Thomas Cook's observation that same year when he 
made a first world tonr with his travel-agency. Nothing in New York seems to 
have more strongly impressed hin1, the Qnaker and temperance man, than the 
jngs of iced water fonnd on every tahle. 'In 1876 the amount required for home 
consumption was over 2,000,000 tons, requiring a force of 4,000 horses and 
155 
10,000 men.' 
As well as anything, it typifies the American entrepreneurial spirit of the 
times; that aronnd a common material, such as natural ice, a whole export indus­
try should he huilt up. Just as mechanisms were devised to tear tree trunks 
from the soil, so in order to harvest ice on American ponds, this heavy manual 
task was hroken into its elements and tools were fashioned to ease and reduce 
it to a minimum. Invention of the ice cutters, which revolutionized the industry, 
dates from the late 1820's. The 'ice plows' had shares armed with teeth that 
cut into the ice like a saw, leaving a deep groove. We recall the tremendous 
inventive activity of this period, which devised new forms of the plow, while 
McCormick was perfecting his reaper and its eutting-har with shark-like teeth. 
Scraping and planing tools, crowhars in great variety, as well as conveyor hands 
to transport the ice from the quarrying place to the icehouse, completod the ice­
harvesting equipment. Even spiral conveyors were patented. 
Such remained the normal method of ohtaiuing ice throughout the century, 
as may he seen from the detailed illustrations given in a technical encyclopedia 
of the 1330's"' (fig. 424). 
Icehouses are directly linked with the time of full mechanization. Once more 
we find small houses scattered across the land, preserving supplies over long 
periods. This time, however, they are not for storing ice-· ohtainahle hy simpler, 
mechanized means- hut for preserving perishable foods, which a new quick­
freezing process allows to he kept for many months in unaltered freshness. The 
first installations of this kind are said to have heen converted from unremunera­
tive artificial ice factories. 
rn The Great Industries of the United Stales, Hartford, 1872, p.156, 
1
~ Appleton's Cyclopedia of Applied Mechanics, New York, 1883, vol. II, p.127. 
1M Ibid. 
425. Ice~Delivery Trade Card, c.1830. Refrigeration 
was first used to take dairy products to market in 1803, says 
Cummings, ihe hiStorian of American food habits. The 
trade increased greatly after the invenfion of the ice pknv, 
and especially when the above'"{}round icehouse 1J)Q,8 intro.­
duced in the 1820's. 