The greal French physiologist is still master of the universal outlook often 
found in the ftrst part of the last century. In his Introduction a la medecine 
expCrimentale, 1865, he expressed his views in more concentrated form. 
The mechanistic outlook of the late nineteenth century, involving interest in 
every detail, lost the power to integrate. Our century is gradually rebuilding 
new universal conceptions as the basis of scientific research. 
In 1921 the Englishman J. 1\f. Langley (The Autonomic Nervous System, Cam­
bridge, 1921) discussed that part of the nervous system that acts within the 
human organism independently of will (parasympathetic). 
In 1929 the American W. B. Cmmon (Bodily Changes in Pain, Ilunger, Fear, and 
Rage, New York, 1929) explained the functioning of another and equally uncon­
scious part of the nervous system (sympathetic). 
In 1925 the Swiss W. R. Hess ('lJeber die Wechselheziehungen zwischen psy­
chischen und vegetativen Funktionen,' in Schweiz. Archiv f. Neurologic und 
Psychiatric, 1925) elucidated the relation between the two systems that had 
previously been described independently, and co-ordinated them in an encom­
passing whole (the vegetative system). The discovery of the means by which a 
poised equilibrium is established between the different functions of these nervous 
systems may help us to discern the direction in which man himself is moving. 
Through centuries our minds have been trained to start with objects, with matter, 
and with experimental research. Just as steel bridges are built springing from 
the ground and with one end freely poised in mid-air, renewed. intellectual con­
ceptions will arise piece by piece without the scaffolding of philosophical systems. 
The evolution away from merely materialistic and mechanistic conceptions must 
start from the new insight into the nature of matter and organisms. 
Dynamic Equilibrium 
Two apparently contradictory phenomena run through human history. 
The human organism can be regarded as a constant. It is by nature confined 
within narrow limits of tolerance. It can adapt itself to a variety of conditions 
and it is physically in a perpetual state of change; but the physical pattern has 
changed very little, as far as science can record. 
719 