(hydropathy). Around 1850 the Islamic concept gained recognition. And the 
home vapor hath had many advocates from around 1830 down to the end of 
the century. These types, together with the shower and the sun bath, appeared 
successively and existed side by side. Long and uncertain was the hattie, hut 
finally the tub bath remained the type unchallenged in popular choice. 
The present-day type of hath, the tub, is actually a mechanization of the 
most primitive type. It belongs in the category of external ablution. The tuh 
is understood as an enlarged washbowl. No period before ours has so unques­
tioningly accepted the hath as an adjunct to the bedroom. Each of its com­
ponents was the outcome of a slow, tedious mechanization; hence the bathroom 
with running water emerged only toward the end of the last century, while 
not until the time of full mechanization between the two World Wars was it 
taken for granted. The fact nevertheless remains that the tuh is a primitive 
hath type, found in Crete, for instance, from around 1800 to 1450 B.c., before 
the Greek gymnasium was conceived. 
The brilliant Minoan age, the last matriarchy, possessed not only hathtuhs, 
hut sewer systems aud water closets. Sir Arthur Evans' tireless excavating has 
given us better insight into this early period than we have, for instance, into 
the Greek gymnasium. The painted terra-cotta tub that Evans pieced together 
2 
from the queen's apartment in the Palace of Knossos in Crete informs us that 
this type of bath, like many other Minoan habits, was taken over hy the Greeks 
of the Mycenean period, around 1250 B.C. The Cretan tuh, modest in dimen­
sions, fits the description of the Mycenean hath in which the Homeric heroes 
bathed. When Homer, looking hack from around 800 B.c., tells of the hath 
ceremony, he refers to it as the restorative following 'soul-exhausting toil.' The 
stress here falls not upon eleanliness but upon relaxation.' 
Sea-bathing was practiced in the same spirit. This goal, relaxation, is hasic 
to the attitude of the ancients. The early Roman house -like that of the older 
Scipio- had its hathtuh on the ground floor where drainage and heating facil­
ities were combined. In his Epistles of Nero's time, Seneca somewhat wistfully 
and moralizingly recalls Scipio's simple habits and fortress-like house with 
window slits so narrow that the tuh lay in near darkness. 
As the thermae developed into public institutions in the first century B.C., 
the isolated hathtuh lost its importance. Immense marble tuhs and huilt-in 
basins, containing warm water and cold, stood in the hot-air rooms of the 
it un­
Roman haths. Islamic culture never accepted the tuh. The Oriental held 
appetizing to bathe in his own dirt. 
2 
Arthur Evans, The Paklce of Minos a! Knossos, London, 1921-35, 4 vols. vol. III, p.385, fig. 256. 
s Odyssey, x, 358ff, 
629 