chair of 1875. This time the two sections are joined along their length by sliding 
hinges. The twin bed is produced in one movement for, quite unexpectedly, 
the lower mattress begins to revolve on two pivots at the middle of either end. 
One bas merely to pull the seat outwards and the lower mattress begins to turn. 
The upper section moves with it until both come to rest in a common horizontal 
plane. 
American solutions of the 'sixties and 'seventies approach certain problems 
along lines parallel to those of today. Form and materials differ, but the methods 
are often the same. 
In 1932 Alvar Aalto brought out a tubular steel sofa, which soon became 
known in Europe as the 'Aalto sofa' (fig. 263). It represents one of the few 
contemporary pieces to have tackled problems of movability: this time it is a 
matter of adjusting the back rest of the sofa to the occupant's comfort. When 
fully lowered, it joins with the seat to form a bed. Aalto's piece was good so 
far as form went, but its governing mechanism was rather rudimentary. Attempt­
ing to smooth out this difficulty in a Swiss factory, we could think of nothing 
better than a device borrowed from the adjustable back rest of hospital beds. 
How is this same problem of motion met by an j\merican 'adjustable sofa' 
42 
of 1868 (fig. 264)? So that the back rest may be adjustable at will and fully 
lowerable, the lower frame has curved rear ends; the upper frame can slide 
through this curve to the horizontal. An arm on either side connects the movable 
frame with the fixed one. To sustain the back at various angles, the curved 
segments are ingeniously notched to admit a bolt held in position by springs. 
Both bolts are released by the simple device of a cord passing through the upper 
frame. This simple construction yields a solution that is not without elegance, 
contrasting with the furniture of our own time in its evident familiarity with 
problems of motion. 
Combinations and Mimicry 
Beds that swing vertically or horizontally away, heds folding upward or upon 
themselves- the most variegated methods have been tried for saving daytime 
space in dwellings. We are thus led into the domain of convertible heds that 
may assume the shape of other furniture by day or may disappear into the wall 
and even into the ceiling. In the earlier stages the process involved no more 
than folding the bed to the wall and sometimes sheathing it in a case. These 
~U.S. Patent 77,872, 12 May 1868. 
432 