We shall deal here with humble things, things not usually granted earnest 
consideration, or at least not valued for their historical import. But no more 
in history than in painting is it the impressiveness of the subject that matters. 
The sun is mirrored even in a coffee spoon. 
In their aggregate, the humble objects of which we shall speak have shaken 
onr mode of living to its very roots. Modest things of daily life, they accumulate 
into forces acting upon whoever moves within the orbit of onr civilization. 
The slow shaping of daily life is of equal importance to the explosions of 
history; for, in the anonymous life, the particles accumulate into an explosive 
force. Tools and objects are outgrowths of fundamental attitudes to the world. 
These attitudes set the course followed by thought and action. Every problem, 
every picture, every invention, is founded orr a specific attitude, without which 
it would never have come into being. The performer is led hy outward impulses 
- money, fame, power- but behind him, unbeknown, is the orientation of the 
period, is its bent toward this particular problem, that particular form. 
For the historian there are no banal things. Like the scientist, the historian 
does not take anything for granted. He has to see objects not as they appear 
to the daily user, hut as the inventor saw them when they flrst took shape. He 
needs the unworn eyes of contemporaries, to whom they appeared marvelous 
or frightening. At the same time, he has to establish their constellations before 
and after, and thus establish their meaning. 
History wTiting is ever tied to the fragment. The known facts are often scat­
stars across the firmament. It should not be assumed that 
tered broadcast, like 
they form a coherent body in the historical night. Consciously, then, we repre­
sent them as fragments, and do not hesitate, when necessary, to spring from one 
period to another. Pictures and words are hut auxiliaries; the decisive step 
must he taken hy the reader. fn his mind the fragments of meaning here dis­
played should become alive in new and manifold relations. 
Before we entered upon the present work we tried, at Yale University in the 
winter of 1941, to suggest in broad outline what brought us to anonymous 
history. At that time we could not foresee how far the inquiry was to lead. 
For this very reason a few passages as then spoken may not be out of place: 
Any inquiry today into the rise of our modern way of life must remain incom­
plete. There is no lack of works tracing the broad political, economic, or socio­
logical trends of onr time. Specialized researches into the various fields are 
also available. But few bridges have been thrown between them. 
If we seek a more general insight into the rise of onr way of life - of onr com-
3 