Movement, Abolitionism, and the servant problem all are rooted in the notion 
that a democrac'Y can suffer no disfranchised class, no privileged sex. 
All these problems agitated America at the time of the Civil War, while 
Europe, having put down all its revolutions, clung to a pseudo-feudalistic class 
system. 
American women held aloof, nevertheless, from such radical projects as the 
Saiut-Simonians in France of the 'thirties put forward and practiced, or from 
Fourier's plan of a society in which la loi de I' attraction was to govern relations 
between the sexes. 
American women are less open to such views. They seek their rights within 
the family framework, an attitude harking back to the Puritan way of life. 
Woman shall rnle in the household. She shall be educated for this, and to this 
she shall educate her children. Marriage forms one fulcrum of her power, educa­
tion the other. Ruling both, her power automatically expands. 
American women opposed radical solutions, but they wanted political respon­
sibility. They fought for it stubbornly between 1848 and 1918. And if educat­
ing women for marriage as a vocation is rooted in Puritan conceptions of the 
family, the quest for political equality stems from Quaker views. The Quakers 
have always regarded women as the equals of men. 
American women 'hold that the natural head of the conjugal association is 
man,' the conservative Alexis de Tocqueville told Europe in his famous De la 
Democratic en Amkriqne (1835). This corrtrasts curiously today with the Declara­
tion of Sentiments agreed upon by the Quakers in 1848 at one of their yearly 
meetings: 'The history of mankind is a history of repeated injuries and usmpa­
tions on the part of man toward woman, having as direct object the establish­
1 
ment of a direct tyranny over her.' In the Quaker's view, 'it is the duty of 
2 
women to secure to themselves their sacred right to the elective franchise.' 
Fem,ale Education and the Feminist Question 
One side of feminism, the wresting of political responsibility, lies beyond our 
present scope. The other side, the assuming of domestic responsibility, leads 
us straight to our problem, the rational household. 
This rationalization was guided hy spiritual motives. And its goals were seen 
before the practical means of attaining them were at hand. 
Such goals do not arise in the void. Usually they are announced by a prophetic 
1 
E. C. Stanton, S. B. Anthony, and M. J. Gage, History of Woman Suffrage, New York, 1881, vol. r, 
p.70. 
2 Ibid. p. 72. 
513 