Nove! tn every (eafure, per{eotly aulomgtfc. Grain compressed and delivered in sheaves of unt{arm size. (J) 
-1 
:::0 
z 
G) 
z 
('] 
(J) 
~ 
:::c 
> 
,m 
c: 
., 
)> 
0 
., 
s: 
~ 
OJ 
- () 
z 
0 
m 
:::0 
Price, with Two Knives and extras - £65 . 
85. Binding Mechanized. Walter A. Wood's First Twine Binder. 1880. The brief lime of the wire binder 
came loan end ll)hen. a satisfactory lndn.e binder Wfl$ invented. (Wood'$ English Caf.aWgue for 1880. Mc­
Cormick llislorical Sociely) 
64 
of wire (fig. 84). But metal did not seem agreeable for this purpose. The com­
plaint that pieces of wire remained in the fodder may have heen less decisive 
than the dislike of having to deal with so refractory a material. 
Wire was to be replaced by twine. By 1880 the twine binder was ready. 
John F. Appleby, the third name and important milestone in the mechanization 
of reaping, had patented, by 1858, a device for binding sheaves with t"ine, had 
abandoned it in favor of wire, finally returning, aronnd 1875, to the original idea. 
86. \Valtcr A. Wood's Trade Mark, Hegi~!x•.red 1875. Walter A. Wood 
con.strucled the mosf elegant agriculfural machinery in the second half of the 
ninefeenfh century. Ile too wa..'>' one of the jirsl ira£! blazers in the use of 
interchangeable parts in large machine~· (Fig. 25). ThiH firm closed in 1904 
and its archives were destroyed. (Wood's Circular for the Year 1876) 
M ln 1871, by the pioneer firm of this period: Walter A. Wood, Hoosick Fall>:!, N.Y. This manufacturer 
produced machines of strikingly ele.gant t:onstruction and was the first out with many of the most inter­
esting inventions_ Among these was the use of tubular steel frames in agricultural machines. On the 
firm's dissolution in 1904, the new owner, it is said, dumped its archives into the river. Thus was lost one 
of the most precious sources for the history of mechanization. His behavior appears less strange when one 
recalls that the Patent Office did not act much differently when it ridded itself of its models in 1926, with 
the sanction of Congress. 
159 