duction of the hot-air hath as a mcaus of regeneration. Urquhart was one of 
those critical and aggressive figores who spring forth when a country is essen­
tially alive- figures who do not need to he geniuses or extraordinarily gifted 
men. We have seen how in England around 1850 the first reform movement 
against industrial production run wild issued from a group of Victorian civil 
61 
servants. Urquhart too belonged to this type of conservative fanatic. He 
sided with the oppressed, regardless of his govermnent's attitude. In 1855, 
when he threw himself wholeheartedly into the task of building up a means 
of regeneralion, he founded a political sheet, the Free Press, which numbered 
Karl Marx " among its contributors. He observed how wars came about in 
his time. He was interested in the intercourse of nations, and, toward the end 
of his life, in its codification, international law, which he saw the great powers 
ceaselessly violating. 
Thus he was interested in interrelations. This may have helped to hring him 
to the Islamic hath, with its concern for the hody as a totality. It was he who 
63 
gave it the name it has retained: Turkish bath. He recognized it as a sur­
vival of civilizations that did not disregard bodily regeneration. His stay in 
the Orient had whetted his sensibility, and he realized how harharic was the 
condition in which Europe unsuspectingly lived. He regarded the smoke­
blackened towns of industrial England and the life people led in them. What 
was being done for the regeneration of the working masses? The rare baths 
endowed hy a few philanthropists were almost as nothing. What else remained? 
Gin and the puh. Why, he argued, was the heat and steam pouring from factory 
64 
chimneys wasted on the air? Could it not he used to better advantage? 
Around 1830, when wounded in the war of Greek liberation, he found the Turkish 
hath still thriving in Greece. He observed its slow dying out on Mediterranean 
shores as the Turks were pushed hack. He wished to save this means of regen­
eration for England." In his work The Pillars of Hercules, an account of a 
journey through southern Spain and Morocco in 1848, he was struck with the 
6
1 In our chapter 'The Mechanization of Adornment.' 
~z 'Revelations of the Political History of the Eighteenth Century,' by Dr. Karl Marx, Free Press, 
vol. r, 16 Aug. 1856. Urquhart's periodical later changed its name to The Diplomalk Review. 
63 
Turkish Bath: In the light of subsequent archeological findings it is all too easy to correct Urquhart's 
scholarship, and point out that be might more accurately have called it the 'Islamic hath,' sin<'R: the 
Turks never basically changed the specific form created by the Arabs. However as the 'Turkish hath' 
had lived for half a millennium under Osmanic protection, Urquhart was quite justified in naming it after 
them. The Islamic bath is a hot-air hath followed by a series of steam chambers at staggered tempera­
tures. The 'Russo-Turkish' or' Romano-Turkish' baths that arose after Urquhart's and other reformers• 
efforts are rudimentary hybrid forms without creative impulse. 
64 Urquhart, The Pillars of Hercules, London, 1850, vol. n, p.80. 
6
In contrast to Urquhart, E. W. Lane, in his still classical Customs of the Modem Egyptians, reported 
5 
on the Islamic bath with the detachment of an anthropologist rather than the concern of a reformer. 
668 