To this category also belongs the bench table (Tischbank, PenllS)'lvania 
Dutch Dischbank), a combination piece consisting of a settle whose high back 
swings around two pivots in the armrests. Lowered to the horizontal, the back 
becomes a table top, so that this chest fumiture may form both a settle and, when 
necessary, a table. Doubtless late Gothic in type, our earliest examples date 
from the sixteenth century (fig. 259). 
Another piece turning about an axis has a late-medieval origin: the revolving 
chair. Havard notes that the revolving chair with freely swiveling seat is men­
37 
tioned toward the end of the fourteenth century, in an inventory of 1391. We 
do not know what was the appearance of these early chairs; bnt like their frf­
teenth- and sixteenth-century successors, they were doubtless for honorific pur­
poses." Here, again, furniture appears in movable form before its modern, 
stable form prevails. 
In the sixteenth century, the revolving chair appears largely developed, nearing 
in form the swivel office chair of the nineteenth. A late sixteenth-century revolving 
chair in the Louvre turns on a single post ending in three sprawls (fig. 160)." 
Perhaps the chair shown by Carpaccio, behind the writing St. Jerome, may 
40 
be taken as an early form of the revolving chair. At any rate, it resembles in 
construction the most famous one of the period: the richly decorated cast-iron 
throne seat of later sixteenth-century Augsburg craftsmanship. 
The late eighteenth century, with its predilection for things mechanically mov­
able, brings a new interest to the revolving chair. Various elegant models 
appeared in the France of Louis XVI. In America, around 1776, Thomas Jeffer­
41
son- this now seems certain - had a revolving chair made. It is a writing 
chair (fig. 161), a Windsor type of colonial simplicity. As we suppose in the chair 
shown by Carpaccio, its seat rotates on a circular base. 
Also belonging to the category of mobile furniture are the bed and cradle on 
42 
rockers, appearing in the frfteenth century . The early rocking chair, known 
as the 'nursing chair' in Lancashire, England, c.1750, further developed in 
43 
America during the late eighteenth century; the combined rocking chair and 
37 Havard, op.cit. vol. IV, col. 1403. 
as 'Deux gran des chaises to urn antes peintes et dor€es' were made in 1484. Ibid. 
39 Molinier, op.cit. vol. n, p.l70. St. Jerome in his study, Senoia degli Sciavoni, Venice. 
40 Carpaccio's biographer Molmenti does not describe it as a revolving chair. Cf. Pompeo Molmenti, 
The Life and Works of Vittorio Carpaccio, London, 1907, p.l32. 
41 Fiske Kimball, 'Thomas Jefferson's Windsor Chair,' Pennsylvania Museum Bulletin, Philadelphia, 
1925, vol. XXI, pp.53--60. 
42 Cf. the Altar of St. Stephan, Barcelona, Palacio Nacional de Monjuic. Illustr. in Grace Hardendorf 
Burr, Hispanic Furniture, New York, 1941, fig. 6. 
43 Cf. Julia W. Torrey, 'Some Early Variants of the Windsor Chair,' Antiques, vol. n, Sept. 1922, 
pp.I06-10, figs. 9 and 10. \Ve owe this and the following references to Miss B. Farwell, Dept. of Adult 
Education, Metropolitan I\.fuseum, New York. 
290 