lhe Constituent J<'urniture and Its Significance 
.lust as samples are taken from an abandoned mine to indicate that some 
material is buried there, we bave taken a few samples representing tbat almost 
unknown complex: tbe nineteenth century's constituent furniture. The presen­
tation, we know, is incomplete; but a start bad to be made in claiming its 
historical birthright and appraising its true worth. That tbe movement will 
gain its rightful place in the history of human comfort we may no longer doubt. 
The history of furnitore and of comfort, from the standpoint of movability and 
combinability, is not yet written, and whoever cares to dig deeper will find ricb, 
unworked material, of which these are tbe first hare hints. 
In English furnitore of the late eighteenth century, the ingenious shaving 
tahles, the relinedly compartmented washstands, tbe cylinder top desks with 
concealed mechanisn1, technique is of one cast with form. Their spirit is not 
split between form and construction. The late eighteenth century's innate 
sensibility enabled it instinctively to fuse its technical with its esthetic experience. 
For behind it lay centuries of tradition and superior craftsmaru;hip. Tbe nine­
teenth century, owing w its split between thinking and feeling, can equal the 
performance only wben function tightly bolds the reins. But inventiveness was 
not lacking, aud it is in tbis that the constitpent furnitore of the nineteenth 
century excels that of former periods. 
The Americans of tbe second half of the century were virtuosos in solving 
motion problems. What makes this material so exciting for the historian are 
the new and unexpected solutions he encounters at every turn: not only the 
historian, hnt also architects and designers, looking back at these forgotten 
solutions for mobility incorporated within tbe organism of furniture, may find 
aid and stimulus. Motion problems are among tbe most difficult of their field. 
One mnst live with these problems and constantly exercise npon them like a 
juggler; then they become second nature. But for this a specific atmosphere 
is needed, jnst as an atmosphere is necessary for the creation of stained-glass 
windows. When such atmosphere fails, the skill and experience die out. This 
happened in the present case. Wben nineteenth-century ruling taste stifled 
patent furniture, furnitore again lapsed into its rigidity. 
Against Mechanization in Furniture 
It is often asserted that furniture should contain no moving parts: they are 
complicated and unnecessary. 
All tbat we can say is that our yes or our no must depend on the conception 
of comfort at any given period. From an absolute standpoint, perhaps, the 
480 