even in his later period he constructed within the Palais-Hoyal the glass-vaulted 
Galerie d'Orlcans, one of the starting pnints of nineteenth-century glass and 
iron construction. 
1 
Charles Percier (1764-1838) was the designer, whose gift for drawing attracted 
early notice; his sure and distinguished stroke may he felt in their conunon work. 
Percier remains in the studio, producing new designs for the French jewelers, 
the Sevres manufactories, the textile weavers and cabinetmakers. The outside 
world holds no great interest for him, and shortly before the end of the Empire 
he retires to his quarters in the Louvre, devoting himself to his pupils as earlier 
in his career. 
Percier and Fontaine's collaboration from 1794 to 1814 (1812 is the date 
sometimes given) meant at once the forming and the unfolding of Empire style. 
Although their collaboration rested on a financial basis, it was the outcome of 
friendship and common ideA~Is. They were brought together in the studio of a 
Paris architect, and again in Rome as Academy scholars. Their common studies 
centered less around Antiquity than one might expect, and more around the 
Henaissance, the period to predominate over all others in nineteenth-century 
architecture. Percier and Fontaine's early discovery of the Renaissance is set 
forth in the two engraved volumes they later published in Paris.' They remained 
four years in Home, the Revolution causing Fontaine to return. In Paris Fontaine 
found hut temporary work as an architect's copyist; he designed hangings and 
textiles but could not make a livelil10od. No one was building. Mter some 
adventures he fled to London without a passport. There the same experience 
awaited him: textile design, wallpaper, ornaments, and snuff-box painting. 
ln London of the early 'nineties the cabinetmaker flourished as never hefore. 
Hobert Adam's influence can doubtless be traced in Empire style. But the 
ornament and plane surfaces influenced Fontaine more than did the ef!icieney 
of English furniture. By then Fontaine was already moving in another direction. 
A letter from his father seems to have cut short his stay in London, for the 
Convention was to dispossess all families having members illegally abroad. 
Percier, who had remained in Paris, had just been offered the position of 
scenic designer to the Opera (1794). He asked that Fontaine should be called 
with him. This was the turning point. 
The task that brought them to Napoleon's notice was that of renovating, in 
1793, the Paris mansion of M. de Chauvelin, once ambassador to England. 
1 
The life and work of Percier and Fontaine have not yet received any adequate evaluation. Although 
there exist fragments of an autobiography by Fontaine, statements concerning dates often widely disagree. 
Mr. Fouche's biography of Pereier and Fontaine in Les Grandf!s Artistes is not sufficiently infonnative. 
2 
Percier and Fontaine, Choix des plus celCbrP--S maisons de plaisancede Rome, Paris, 1809; Palais, maisons 
et aut.res edifices modernes it Rome, Paris, 1798; 2nd ed., Paris, 1830. 
333 