utilitarianism that feared no financial risk or danger, the first mechanization 
of production was accomplished. In the following century the mechanization of 
cotton spinning became everywhere almost synonymous with industrialization. 
The Simple and the Complicated Craft 
First experiences are often decisive for the future development. Of mecha­
nization this is certainly trne in more than one respect. What distinguishes 
European from American mechanization can be observed in the eighteenth­
century beginnings as it can a century and a half later. Europe began with the 
mechanizing of the simple craft: spinning, weaving, iron making. America pro­
ceeded otherwise from the first. America began with the mechanizing of the 
complicated ~Taft. 
Wllile Richard Arkwright, around 1780, was fighting his way upward to a 
power without precedent, Oliver Evans, ou the banks of a solitary creek not 
far from Philadelphia, was mechanizing the complicated craft of the miller. This 
was achieved by continuous line production, in which the human hand was 
eliminated, from the unloading of the grain to the processed flour. 
At that time there was no American industry. Trained workers were scarce. 
The well-to-do imported from England their fme furniture, glassware, carpets, 
fabrics; the pioneer fanner of the hinterland made his own utensils and furniture. 
The sudden leap from Robinsonian conditions anlid the virgin forest into an 
advanced stage of mechanization is a phenomenon that recurs again and again 
in this period. The impulse behind it was the necessity to economize labor and 
the dearth of skilled workers. The way in which, simultaneously with the open­
ing of the prairie to agriculture around 1850, the necessary machinery was created 
and the complicated craft of the farmer increasingly mechanized forms one of 
the most interesting chapters of the nineteenth century. But the impulse was 
there eveu earlier. Only thus cau we understand that by 1836 two mid-western 
farmers had on the field a harvesting machine (fig. 89) that performed in a con­
tinuous production line the entire harvesting task of threshing, cleaning, and 
bagging the grain. It appeared about a century ahead of its time. These symp­
toms assert the orientation from which sprang the whole development of the 
United States. The dimensions of the land, its sparse population, the lack of 
trained labor and correspondingly high wages, explain well enough why America 
mechanized the complicated craft from the outset. 
Yet an essential reason may lie elsewhere. The settlers brought over their 
European mode of living, their European experience. But from the organization 
of the complicated craft and the whole culture in which such institutions had 
38 