THE MECHANIZATION OF THE BATH 
Types of Regeneration 
External Ablution or Total Regeneration? 
THE BATH and its purposes have held different meanings for different ages. The 
manner in which a civilization integrates bathing within its life, as well as the 
type of l>athing it prefers, yields searching insight into the inner nature of 
the period. 
Bathing, in whatever fashion performed, is concerned with care of the body. 
To maintain the balmwe of this delicate instrument, to dwell in harmony with 
our organism, is a prime necessity of life. Some periods have viewed bathing as 
part of a broad ideal: total regeneration. Other periods have seen it as a mere 
ablution to he performed in swiftest routine. One age may weave bathing into 
the well-being of the whole man. Another age may see it as an isolated act, or 
neglect it almost altogether.' 
The role that bathing plays within a culture reveals the culture's attitude 
toward human relaxation. It is a measure of how far individual well-being is 
regarded as an indispensihle part of community life. 
This is a social problem. Should society assume responsibility for guarding 
health and promoting well-being, or is this a private matter? Is it a duty of 
the state to provide the agencies of relaxation regardless of cost? Or should it 
regard its people as mere components of the production line, leaving them to 
their own devices as soon as they have finished their work? 
The ancient world, like Islam, and to some extent the Middle Ages, too, 
regarded human regeneration as a basic social responsil>ility. This concept 
decayed during the Renaissance, while bodily care in the seventeenth and eight­
eenth centuries sank to the point of almost total neglect. But during the 
eighteenth century the culture of earlier ages slowly CalllC hack to remembrance. 
The nineteenth, that century which looked so much to other cultures, awak­
ened to the idea of regeneration. Bathing appeared around 1830, in the gnise 
of a hack-to-nature movement laying much stress upon cold-water treatments 
1 
This chapter is partly based upon the author's earlier enquiries into the matter of regeneration, 
interrupted by other work in 1938. Extracts appeared at the time of Das Had mt J< uliurganzen exhibition 
held at the Kunstgewerbe Museum, ZUrich, in 1935. Cf. Wegleitung des Kunstgewerbe Museums der 
Stadt Zuerich, no. 125, ZUrich, 1935, and 'Das Bad als Kulturmass,' in Schweizerische Bauzeitung, 
ZUrich, July 1935. 
628 