By now the movernent has lost its former keenness. This shows up in the 
way the hack rest of the early models is made mobile. Tilting panels branch 
10 
from the framework of the chair; they seem excrescences rather than a mech­
11 
anical device. The solution of 1896 (apparently the first patented), with its 
four sickle-shaped springs joining seat to back rest, does not appear any too 
12 
satisfactory (fig. 241).
Springing the back rest was an idea put forward around 1730 hy the Nurem­
berg furniture designer, Johann Jacob Schuebler (fig. 239). He calls it a 'French 
comfortable chair in which the hack rest is padded to the hollow of a man's back 
and is provided with a spring so that the backrest will flex backwards, bending 
but not breaking.' 
This chair, with its sprung back rest, was for use at a writing desk, hut it 
undoubtedly involves the principle of the later typewriter chair. 
Gradually a form of support was developed that would automatically seek 
contact with the typist's shoulders; it has a forward tilt as in the sewing machine 
chair of 1371. But this time the whole back rest is mobile, being pressed to the 
spine by a spring beneath the seat. These are called 'posture chairs.' The sitter 
must first push hack the forward-tilted hack rest, which will then cling to his 
hody and constantly follow his movements. 
Thus, around 1900, the hack rest hecomes a 'back-supporting arm hinged to 
the seat,' like the beam of a balanc,e. The short arm projects downward beneath 
the seat, where it is connected in one of many ways with a spring that maintains 
13 
the back rest in constant forward pressure.
During the metal shortage of the Second World War, wooden models were 
put on the market, in which the occupant's weight was used as a substitute for 
springs. Gravity supplied the constant leverage necessary to spring the back rest. 
Lyi.ng 
With the same lack of constraint that marked its sitting, the nineteenth 
century explored the possible manners of lying. Prolonged rest, night-time 
sleep, was not its ohjeet here. It sought a furniture for passing relaxation. 
For such pieces to have heen admitted within the house, social convention must 
have sanctioned the informal posture that Bonington so keenly sensed in his 
'Reclining Woman' of 1826, before the corresponding chairs existed (fig. 233). 
10 U.S. Patent 574,602, 5 Jan. 1897, Franklin Chichester. 
n U.S. Patent 552,502, 7 Jan. 1896, H. L. Andrews. 
12 The inventor did not give up, and later arrived at a fom1 approximating that standard today. 
n U.S. Patent 647,178, 10 Apr. 1900, 
407 