slowly to decline around the end of the century. By 1940 less than 1 in 4 of 
the total population lived on farms." 
In the latter half of the nineteenth century, with the widening of the railroad 
network, the accelerated growth of metropoli, and, in America, the mechanizing 
of many complicated crafts, the influence of mechanization was already reaching 
deeper into life. 
Now, around 1920, mechanization involves the domestic sphere. For the 
first time it takes possession of the house and of whatever in the house is sus­
ceptible of mechanization: the kitchen, the hath, and their equipment, which 
capture the fantasy and arouse the acquisitive instinct of the public to an aston­
ishing degree. In the time of full mechanization more appliances grew into 
household necessities than had heen introduced in the whole preceding century. 
They absorb an unprecedented share of space, cost, and attention. To establish 
at what moment the various electrical appliances became popularized we 
15 
addressed a questionnaire to one of the large mail-order houses; it appears 
that the minor appliances- fans, irons, toasters, wringers- entered the eat­
alogues in 1912; the electric vacuum cleaner in 1917; the electric range in 1930; 
and the electric refrigerator in 1932. 
The mechanization of the kitchen coincides with the mechanizing of nutri­
tion. AB the kitchen grows more strongly mechanized, the stronger grows the 
demand for processed or ready-made foods. 
Around 1900 the canning industry -meat packing excepted -was still in 
a rather chaotic state in regard both to production and to quality. The time 
of full mechanization brings an enormous increase in the output and varieties 
of processed foods: from excellent eanned soups, spaghetti in sauce, and strained 
hahy food, to canned dog, cat, or turtle food. The time of full mechanization 
is identical with the time of the tin ean. 
The phenomenon of submitting food to mass production is likewise seen in 
the development of chain restaurants. A single enterprise in a single building 
in New York prepares food for 300,000 people daily. Doughnuts swimming 
in hot fat are transported on the endless helt, and the march of apple pies goes 
on continuously through the immense trnmel oven hy military rows of twelve. 
We shall confine ourselves ahnost exclusively to mechanization's advance 
into the private sphere,-and to the simpler things, such as the kitchen, the hath­
room, and their appliances. But mechanization implanted itself more deeply. 
It impinged upon the very center of the hmnau psyche, through all the senses. 
u Sixteenth Census of the United State.-;, 1940, 'Agriculture,' vol. III, p.22. 
1li We owe this information to Professor Richard M. Bennett, who was for a time with Montgomery 
Ward in Chi<.:ago. 
42 