fanns at least 180 hectares in extent.' '" In other words, they wished large-scale 
landowning and mechanization, 'Who, if not a rich lam! owner,' they argued, 
'will have available the implements needed for the obtaining of a better product 
14 
at lower cost?' 
The Physiocrat attitude toward other occupations re-echoed the complaints 
of Roman authors nuder the Empire, such as Junius Columella's De Re llll$tica 
(On Husbandry), then to he read in English and French translations, Finance 
was 'odious'; the Inilitary vocation, one of blood and slaughter; the legal pro­
15 
fession, one of 'harking and snarling,' 
Natural law and natural rights are also reflected in Jean-Jacques Rousseau's 
writings at this time, but in another direction, To Rousseau, nature stands for 
all in man that is inborn, non-artificial, and uncultivated, He too does not look 
to the peasant, but to primitive man, then known as the 'savage,' obedient to 
his own instinct, And instead of extolling the large landowner, Housscau holds 
that the man was founder of society who first sowed a piece of grouncl, saying 
'This land is mine,' and found others to believe him, We mention this to show 
how the approach to nature furnished the ideological basis for most varied 
phenomena, from poets and economists, to pedagogues, kings, and the first 
industrial theorists, 
Adam Smith, who first recognized the division of labor as the basis of industry, 
also recognized the farmer as a mainstay of society and the farmer's work as 
'the most productive of economic enterprises and the fundamental type of them 
16 
alL' This economist, who composed his Enquiry into th£ Nature of the Causes 
of the Wealth of Nations "~thin the two decades prior to its issue in 1776- that 
is, while the Physiocrats were at their peak and Housseau was in his most fertile 
period- also valued the 'security and lranquillit)' of the fam1er's life,' 
Looking backwards, the perspective becomes all too easily foreshortened, 
The preparation of mechanized spinning and weaving did not take place in the 
limelight, It was ,an inconspicuous process, Industry as later understood had 
no status in the eighteenth century, Industry was synonymous with handicraft, 
The highly refined crafts of the period were taken quite for granted by contempo­
raries, The Encyclopedists, to whose engravings we owe much of our insight into 
the anonymous history of the century, were performing an unusual task, Diderot, 
in the Discours Preliminaire to the Grande Encyclopedic, 1751, tells us that no 
1a Ibid. p.88. 
4 
1 Ibid. p.83. 
l& Paul H. Johnstone, 'In Praise of Husbandry,' Agriculiuralll is tory, Wisconsin, 193i, comprehensiveJy 
surveys the literature from Antiquity onwards. For more recent times in England and France, see the 
same author's 'Turnips and Romanticism,' ibid. vol. xm, 1938, pp.244-55. 
ta Johnstone, 'Turnips and Romanticism,' ibid. p.245. 
,, 
137 