The object now was to transform the unorganized kitchen into an organized one. 
'The rearrangement of the equipment resulted in reducing the mnnber of opera­
' tions from 50 to 24.' This ean clearly be seen in a process chart, which is a little 
182 
, masterpiece of analysis.
But turning to the available appliances (fig. 345) one found only a chaotic 
miscellany warranting Lillian Gilbreth's statement, 'The manufacturer mnst 
realize that at present [1930] he has little knowledge of what the housewife 
183 
needs. She herself seldom knows what she wants, much less what she needs.' 
Fnll mechanization was to bring about unity between the appliance and the 
working surface. The electrified appliances that came on the market in rapid 
succession lent themselves to the building-in of refrigerator, water supply, 
184
electric motors, electric dishwashing machine - even e1ectric garbage dis­
posers- and to the marketing of kitchens as complete units. 
In 1932 General Electric and in 1934 Westinghouse Electric opened special 
cooking institutes. In the aftermath of the Depression, purchasing power had 
to be attracted in new ways. No doubt this had something to do with the open­
ing of such institutes. But the main reason must be sought elsewhere; the time 
of full mechanization was at hand. Integration of all the equipment with the 
work process had become inevitable. 
Instantly the tremendous resources of industry were made available; the work 
process in the kitchen was scientifically investigated down to the last detail of 
food preparation. Expert staffs of engineers, chemists, architects, nutritionists, 
and practicing cooks studied everything connected with the kitchen. The prin­
ciples of scientific housekeeping could at last be put into practice; in little time 
the 'streamline kitchen' was complete."' 
Soon the large corporations went even further. They understood that the 
reorganization of the kitchen had affected the whole house. Early in 1935 Gen­
eral Electric sponsored a competition for a 'House of Modern Living,' to stimu­
late an interest in the design and production of small homes that would take 
advantage of new methods of construction, the most up-to-date of equipment, 
and the new-found Government support of small home finance."' 
182 Cf. 'Efficiency Methods Applied to Kitchen Design,' Architectural Record, Maroh 1930, pp.291-2. 
1~ Ibid. p.294. 
1M It is said that one of the large corporations began to plan unit kitchens in order to foster a market 
for its expensive dishwashing machines. 
Jss In 1945 standardization was agreed upon hy twenty-five manufacturers of gas appliances and eight 
members of the kitchen-<::abinet industry. • Depth of counter top 25i" to accommodate automatic washer . 
. . . Height of base cabinets 36", considered standard for woman of average stature. . . . Widths of 
base and top cabinets will he in units of three .... ' N. Y. Times, 13 July 1945. 
ISS 'The House for Modern Living,' Architectural Forum, Apr. 1935, p.275. 
616 