The resilient cantilever seat that Europe created in 1927 to satisfy an inner 
need had appeared in America in the 'eighties. We first find it in unexpected 
whereabouts: in agricultural machines. In the 'sixties already the seats of 
sulky plows, mowers, and reapers were being bracketed to the frame hy a single 
support that projected diagonally into the air. In the early 'eighties, the manu­
facturers set out to discard all wooden parts and to make their machines -
plows, harrows, and reapers -of iron alone. Tnhular frames were widely used 
for the sake of lightness. At this moment, support of the driver's seat became 
a resilient steel strip that would take up the jarring of rough ground (fig. 324). 
Cast or stampei!, the seat with its large ventilation holes admirably fits the hody 
and is in direct line of the saddle scats of early nineteenth-century American 
Windsor chairs (fig. 235). 
Had a fraction of the thought devoted to the comfort of the reaper seat been 
extended to domestic utensils, how much further we would he today! 
The idea of the free-hovering and resilient seat seems to have moved the 
American inventors at the peak of the patent-furniture movement. One of 
them imagined, in 1889, a curious device for sea-going vessels (fig. 325). To a 
large round dining tahle, rotary to facilitate the serving of meals, the chairs 
were adjustably fastened hy 'suspensory rods,' while a weight beneath the 
seat helped the passenger 'preserve as near a vertical position independent of 
22 
the motion of the table.' 
These examples are merely indicative of the fact that the problems of American 
patent-furniture and the later European movement often tend in the same 
direction. In the case of the cantilever chair this overlapping is even more 
obvious. 
Washington refused to grant Mies van der Robe's patent for his tubular 
cantilever chair. He was referred to specifications drawn up a few years earlier 
23 
for a chair likewise resilient, and having curved supports (fig. 327) . True to 
the American tradition, it was equipped with adjustable gadgets and derived 
its springiness from a spiral winding. This American chair, applied for in 1922, 
was conceived not as tubular, hut as being made of solid steel rods. In other 
words it did not touch upon the most difficult and pivotal problem of European 
tnhular furniture: how to secure resiliency without mechanism; moreover it 
was intended not for the living room hut as a 'lawn-chair.' 
This chair seems never to have been executed. Nevertheless, Mies van der 
Rohe told us he was obliged to build a model on the American's specifications 
22 
U.S. Patent 396,089, 15 Jan. 1889. Rotary dining table. 
M U.S. Patent 1,491,918, 29 Apr. 1924 (Application 1922). 'The primary object is to provide a novel 
lawn-<:hair ... which is of resilient nature. . . . The main body portion thereof is formed from a single 
strand of steel rod and bent into such a form as to provide a support for a flexible back seat rest.' 
496 