The Roman hath and the Islamic hath must rely upon numerous attendants. 
Both drew upon a plentiful labor supply. The Russian bath is the simplest of 
regeneration types, and perhaps the most natural. It calls for no massive 
hnildings, no technified apparatus, and no slaves. The whole pattern suggests 
an origin in remote times, now lost in historical darkness. The austerity of the 
Russian hath corresponds to a humble standard of living. It is at the same time 
the most democratic and the most long-lived type of regeneration. 
Mter late Gothic times, the bath ceased to be a social institution. We tried 
to show the chaos and helplessness in which the nineteenth century lingered 
before making a small part of its technical genius available to human require­
ments. Finally, this century, in the time of fnii mechanization, created the 
bath-cell, which, with its complex plumbing, enameled tub, and chromium taps, 
it appended to the bedroom. Yet the fact cannot be lost from sight that this 
convenience is no substitute for a social type of regeneration. It is tied to the 
plane of simple ablution. 
A culture that rejects life in stunted form voices a natural demand for the 
restoring of the bodily equilibrium of its members through institutions open to 
all. Whether as Homan marble balls or as Siberian log-cabin is unimportant. 
Neither, as so often claimed, is finance the decisive factor. Financial considera­
tions are often no more than pretexts. 
A period like ours, which has allowed itself to become dominated by produc­
tion, finds no time in its rhythms for institutions of this kind. That is why the 
nineteenth century failed in its efforts to revive the regeneration of former ages 
or to devise new types shaped to our specific needs. Such institutions stood in 
contradiction to the period. 
Regeneration is something that cannot arise in isolation. It is part of a broader 
concept: leisure. Jacob Burckhardt found in the word U.per~ the key to Greek 
conduct. Leisure, in this sense, means a concern with things beyond the merely 
useful. Leisure means to have tin1e. Time to live. Life ean he tasted to the full 
only when activity and contemplation, doing and not doing, form complementary 
poles, like those of a magnet. None of the great cultures has failed to support 
this concept. 
712 