dates or facts for the various trades were then on record. He and his collab­
17 
orators had to learn these viva voce from the workers themselves. At the time 
when the Physiocrats, J.-J. Rousseau and Adam Smith, were at work, and the 
Encyclopedie, 1751-72, was slowly being brought forth volnme by volnme despite 
strong opposition, a few poor handicraftsmen of Lancashire, men of the lowest 
social class, were devising apparatus for mechanical spinning, and James Watt 
was completing the invention of a workable steam engine. What was later to 
become synon)'lllons with industrialization was then embodied in experiments 
among hundreds of others, which never saw daylight. 
If in the first volnme of the Transactions of the Society of Arts, 1733, we com­
pare the models exhibited in the 'repositories' of the Society thus far in the 
course of its career, we find 63 examples in class I, 'machines and models be­
18 
longing to agriculture,' as agaiust the some 20 examples in class III, 'machines 
and models belonging to the manufacturer' - a few spinning wheels, reels, etc., 
but not a single important industrial innovation. These numbers well reflect the 
proportionate interest taken in agriculture and in industry. 
The New Husbandry 
The theoretical edifice of the French Physiocrats, soon burned down in the 
Revolution, became a reality in England. 
Unlike the French aristocracy, the landed gentry of England were at no time 
more active than in the waning eighteenth century. The result was that the 
aristocrates lost their heads or became impoverished, while tbe British land­
owners gained power and wealth. The productive energy that ran through all 
classes and callings in England also touched the gentleman farmer. Some of 
these devoted their efforts to a particular aspect of agriculture. Lord Townsend 
studied the rotation of m·ops. Robert Bakewell, 1725-95, specialized, around 
1760, in the systematic breeding of sheep and cattle for slaughter; he re-invig­
orated the breed of farmhorses with excellent results. In the hall of his house 
the skeletons of his most celebrated animals were set up. Bakewell never made 
his principles public. He regarded them as trade secrets. Essentially they con­
sisted in mating the best specimens of various breeds and in taking care not to 
19 
mix good stock with inferior.
7 
1 'Tout nous determinait done a recourir aux ouvriers.' 
18 
Transactions of the Society, Instituted at Lmulon, for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and 
Commerce, with the PremiJJJW~ Offered in the Year 1783, London, 1783, vol. I, p.309. Agricultural imple­
ments; machines for sowing turnips, drills for beans and wheat, plows with shares, drill plows, machinei. 
for cutting straw, threshing'and winnowing machines, etc. 
19 
Lord F..mle, English Farminf! Past and Present, new ed., London, 1936, pp.l76-89. 
138 