as the charge was released. But completely foreign to their outlook was the 
idea of placing their great inventive talents in the service of production. 
This book's suhject compels us to pass over the period which by its experi­
mentation is closer than almost any other to the nineteenth century - Hellen­
1 
istic Alexandria, of the third and second centuries n.c.
Among the most fertile ideas of Alexander the Great was that of Hellenizing 
the East, and for this he founded the city of his name on the Nile Delta, much 
as, earlier, the Greeks had founded Miletus or any of their colony cities. Here, 
through Greek thinkers and scientists, emerged a civilization oriented toward 
precise science. Its doctors laid down the bases of brain anatomy, gynaecology, 
and surgery. And sirnilarly with the foundations of geometry (Euclid) and 
astronomy (Ptolemy). 
Amid this atmosphere, under the Ptolemies, throve the Alexandrian School 
of inventors, whose writings, schemes, and experiments reflect the calm leisure 
as well as the complex character of this Hellenistic city: on one hand the precision 
of Greek thinking, on the other the love of the marvelous that flourished in the 
Orient. 
The Alexandrian inventors were masters in combining the so-called 'simple 
machines,' such as the screw, the wedge, the wheel and axle, the lever, the pulley, 
powered by combinations of water, vacuum or air pressure, to carry out com­
plicated movements or manipulations. Thus the temple gates swung open auto­
matically as soon as fire was kindled on the altar and swung to when the flame 
died. Religious plays, several acts in length, were staged with mechanically 
moved figures, which, to minimize friction, Hero put on wheels gliding over 
rails of wood. So far as we know, no sign of an application to practical trans­
portation has been found. Wooden rails are said to have appeared in English 
mines in the early seventeenth century. Here they eased the hauling of coal 
wagons. Only about 1770 did the general use of rolling stock on wooden rails 
astonish continental visitors to English coal mines.' 
}conomic reasons can easily be given to explain the lack of interest in pro­
duction: the ancients had cheap labor at their disposal in the form of slaves. 
But this fails to explain why they did not apply their knowledge practically; 
did not use their rails to speed the vehicles on their highways; used their 
automatons to dispense consecrated water and did not mmmercialize them for 
selling beverages; did not put to everyday use their facility with vacuum, air 
pressure, and mechanical contrivances. 
l The following remarks are based on unpublished studies by the author on The Inventive Impulse. 
2 T. S. Ashton, Iron and Steel in the Industrial Revolr:tlitm, London, 1924, p.63. 
33 