The Nineteenth Century 
The Beginnings of Ruling Taste 
More than in the Rococo, in which Louis XV's role was not a very active one, 
a particular type of man becomes decisive in the Empire: Napoleon. Here 
phenomena appear, such as the devaluation of symbols, which have been laid 
at the door of mechanization alone. 
The Mechanization of Adornment 
The misuse of mechanization to imitate handicraft production and the use 
of substitute materials comes to the fore in England between 1820 and 1850. 
The blurring of the instincts is clearly recognized by English Reformers around 
1850. Through criticism and encouragement, attempts are made to influence 
industry directly. 
The Reign of the Upholsterer 
From the upholsterer's hand comes that cushion furniture of the latter half 
of the century which seems to have lost all structure. These are transitory 
products of a surprising longevity. To avoid vague judgments, we have thought 
it useful to consider them typologically. 
What types are found? In what way are they connected with mechanization? 
How is their form related to the introduction of spiral springs? When do they 
first come into use? 
The Surrealists have given us keys to the psychic unrest that haunted mechan­
ized adornment, cushion furniture, and the whole iuterior. 
The Constituent fUrniture of the Nineteenth Century 
Over against the ruling taste stands the unexplored complex of 'patent­
furniture.' In this case, mechanization is harnessed to the opening of new fields. 
Here, where unobserved, the creative instinct of the nineteenth century reveals 
itself, fulfilling needs formerly without solution. This fnrniture that answers 
to the posture of the nineteenth century is the work of the engineer. It is hased 
on movability and adjustability to the body. In America, between 1850 and 
the late 'eighties there grew a facility never known in Europe for solving motion 
problems of this kind, which America lost back to the influence of ruling taste 
after 1893. 
The Constituent Furniture of the Twentieth Century 
The initiative now passes into European hands. The new furniture created 
in this period is hound up with the spatial conceptions of the new architecture. 
8 