64 
written more amusingly of this than Henry Ford himself. In such periods, 
every problem seems solved and ,every path trodden. Nothing remains of the 
morning freshness of the 'thirties, when a J. G. Bodmer could invent and con­
struct from beginning to end both the machines and the tnols with which to 
fabricatp them. A new impulse could spring only from a new product, one that 
had to lJe created from the ground up: This around 1900 was the automobile. 
Henry Ford's function is to have first recognized democratic possibilities in 
the vehicle that had always ranked as a privilege. The idea of transforming so 
complicated a mechanism as the motorcar from a luxury article into one of 
common use, and of bringing its price within reach of the average man, would 
have heen unthinkable in Europe. 
The belief that the automobile could he made an article of mass production, 
and from this conviction the complete revolutionizing of the manufacture of the 
product assure Henry Ford his historical position. 
Like mass production in butchCiing, mass production of a new means of 
transportation, the automobile, became a stimulus for the assembly line, which 
from there spread to the inflexibly routinized machine factories. 
'The Ford shop's assembling practice is tn place the most suitable components 
on elevated ways or rails and to carry it past successive groups of workmen, 
who flx tlie various components to the principal component, until the assembling 
65 
is completed.' How this was carried out in Ford's Highland Park factory at 
Detroit in 1913-14; how, in April 1913, 'the fust experiment of an assembly 
line on assembling the fly-wheel of a magneto'" was attC1Ilpted; how the motor 
assembly was split intn eighty-four different operations, taking a third of the 
former time; how the chassis was first placed on rails, operated by a rope and 
pulley, can he read in Ford's own hook or in detailed accounts printed as early 
67 
as 1915.
To realize his conviction that the automohile must become a people's vehicle 
Henry Ford employs the means and the ideas of his time. He nses them like 
building-stones, often with fresh meaning, and simplifying them wherever 
possible. The assembly line supplants Taylor's motion studies and the yet more 
complex fatigue studies of his successors. The interchangeability of parts, 
already known in the Held of agricultural machinery in the 'sixties for main­
tenance of the reaper, takes on another nuance in Ford's hands. He stre,sscs 
its usefulness for the automobile: :The machinery of today, especially that which 
64 Henry Ford, My Life and Work, New York, 1922, p.86. 
M Horace Lucien Arnold and Fay Leone Fanrote, Ford Methods and the Ford Shop, N.Y., 1915, p.I02. 
oo Henry Ford, op.cit. p.80. 
e1 ArnOld and Fanrote, op.cit. 
116 