all departments and workshops. They became fascinated by the creative atti- 
tude of their Master Magician. 
The most characteristic artistic quality in Oskar Schlemmer's work is his 
interpretation of space. From his paintings, as well as from his stage work 
for ballet and theater, it is apparent that he experienced space not only 
through mere vision but with the whole body, with the sense of touch of the 
dancer and the actor. 
He transformed into abstract terms of geometry or mechanics his obser- 
vation of the human figure moving in space. His figures and forms are pure 
creations of imagination, symbolizing eternal types of human character 
and their different moods, serene or tragic, funny or serious. 
Possessed with the idea of finding new symbols, he considered it a "mark 
of Cain in our culture that we have no symbols any more and - worse - 
that we are unable to create them." Endowed with the power of genius to 
penetrate beyond rational thought, he found images which expressed meta- 
physical ideas, e.g. the star form of the spread-out fingers of the hand, the 
sign of infinity w of "the folded arms." The mask of disguise, forgotten 
on the stage of realism since the theater of the Greeks and used today only 
in the No theater of Japan which - as we believe - Schlemmer did not 
know, became a stage tool of great importance in Schlemmer's hands. I want 
to quote a vivid and characteristic report of a Bauhaus pupil of Schlemmer's, 
T. Lux Feininger, who saw "with breathless excitement, admiration, and 
wonder an evening's performance of the stage class in the Bauhaus theater." 
He writes : 
"At an early age I had occupied myself intensely with the making of 
masks in various materials, I hardly could say why, yet sensing dimly that in 
this form of creation a meaning lay hidden for me. On the Bauhaus stage, 
these intuitions seemed to acquire body and life. I had beheld the 'Dance of 
Gestures' and the 'Dance of Forms,' executed by dancers in metallic masks 
and costumed in padded, sculptural suits. The stage, with jet-black backdrop 
and wings, contained magically spotlighted, geometrical furniture : a cube, a 
white sphere, steps; the actors paced, strode, slunk, trotted, dashed, stopped 
short, turned slowly and majestically; arms with colored gloves were ex- 
tended in a beckoning gesture; the copper and gold and silver heads . . . were 
laid together, flew apart; the silence was broken by a whirring sound, ending 
in a small thump; a crescendo of buzzing noises culminated in a crash fol- 