feeling for play and for the miraculous. Utilitarianism has gone a long way 
in killing it. Amazed at the flood of technological advance, we accept these 
wonders of utility as being already perfected art form, while actually they 
are only prerequisites for its creation. "Art is without purpose" insofar as the 
imaginary needs of the soul can be said to be without purpose. In this time of 
crumbling religion, which kills the sublime, and of a decaying society, which 
is able to enjoy only play that is drastically erotic or artistically outre, all 
profound artistic tendencies take on the character of exclusiveness or of 
sectarianism. 
And so there remain only three possibilities for the artist in the theater 
today! 
He may seeh realization within the confines of the given situation. This 
means cooperation with the stage in its present form - productions in which 
he places himself at the service of writers and actors in order to give to their 
work the appropriate optical form. It is a rare case when his intentions coin- 
cide with those of the author. 
Or he may seeh realization under conditions of the greatest possible freedom. 
This exists for him in those areas of staging which are primarily visual dis- 
play, where author and actor step back in favor of the optical or else achieve 
their effect only by virtue of it: ballet, pantomime, musical theater, and the 
like. It also exists in those areas - independent of writer and actor - of the 
anonymous or mechanically controlled play of forms, colors, and figures. 
Or he may isolate himself altogether from the existing theater and cast his 
anchor far out into the sea of fantasy and distant possibilities. In this case 
his projects remain paper and model, materials for demonstration lectures 
THE TWO SOLEMN TRAGEDIANS (DIE BEIDEN PATHETIKER) (working drawing.) 
Two monumental figures, proscenium height, personifications of lofty concepts such as 
Power and Courage, Truth and Beauty, Law and Freedom. Their dialog: voices amplified 
by megaphones proportionate to the size of the figures; fluctuating in volume, at certain 
times with orchestral accompaniment. 
The figures - on wagons - are conceived as three-dimensional reliefs; cloth skirts 
trail behind upon entrance; masks and torsos of papier-m8ch6 are covered with metallic 
foil; arms are hinged in order to make possible sparse and significant gestures. 
By contrast, and to give the proper scale, there is natural man with his natural voice, 
moving about in the three zones of the stage (i.e., up, down, and center stage), establish- 
ing the dimensions vocally and physically. 