integral parts of his mural compositions - as, for instance, in the Bauhaus 
buildings in Weimar. His are the only murals of our time I know which offer 
a complete fusion and unity with architecture. 
Oskar Schlemmer's literary bequest, particularly his chapter on "Mensch 
und Kunstfigur," the principal article of this book, is classic in form and con- 
tent. In it he offers basic values for stage art cast in a beautiful and concise 
language, reinforced by illustrations and diagrams in his unique handwrit- 
ing. Such clarity and control of thought, reaching universal and timeless 
validity, mark a man of vision. 
From quite a different angle came the contribution of Laszlo Moholy- 
Nagy to the Bauhaus stage. Originally an abstract painter, his inner urge 
caused him to penetrate into many fields of artistic design: typography, ad- 
vertising art, photography, film, theater. He was a man of fiery spirit, full of 
vitality, love, and contagious enthusiasm. The aim of his creations was to 
observe "vision in motion" in order to find a new space conception. Entirely 
unprejudiced by conventional methods, he ventured into ever new experi- 
ments with the curiosity of a scientist. In order to enrich visual representa- 
tion, he applied new materials and new mechanical means to his work. His 
article in this book, "Theater, Circus, Variety," gives evidence of his exuberant 
imagination. With it is included his "Score Sketch for Mechanized Eccentric" 
for the stage, which offers a synthesis of form, motion, sound, light, color, 
and scent. 
Out of his theoretical laboratory experiments in the Bauhaus, Moholy 
later developed original stage settings for the Kroll Opera House in Berlin 
for the Tales of Hoffmann and for other operatic and theatrical perform- 
ances which brought him fame as a stage designer between the two world 
wars. 
Those years in the Bauhaus were a period of mutual stimulation. I my- 
self felt that the modern stage and theater which would do justice to these 
new interpretations of theatrical space was still to be created. The opportunity 
arrived with the performances of Erwin Piscator in Berlin in 1926, for whom 
I designed the "Total Theater," the building of which had to be abandoned 
after the German "Black Friday" shortly before Hitler and the Nazis took over 
the government of Germany. 
At the "Volta Congress" in Rome on the "Teatro Dramatico" in 1935, I 