promises were inevitable, and interpretations or interpolations through 
translation were necessary. But only to a certain extent, for to "be oneself" in 
translating Schlemmer or Moholy-Nagy turned out to be almost impossible. 
Very often the literal translation was exactly the right thing. 
The parenthetical use of the original German after the translated phrase, 
an easy way out in the minds of some, was made resolutely and frequently, 
but, in self-justification perhaps, not nearly so frequently as the temptation 
arose. A further attempt to retain flavor seemed to call for the incorporation 
of much of the original punctuation, italics, and capitalizing; and so they 
too remain - auf gut Gliick. A few liberties were taken with the paragraph- 
ing. And a few notes on the text were indicated. I hope that the informed 
reader will be able to follow what is not easy even in the original and will 
approve of the method of translation andits result. 
If this edition succeeds in arousing interest as a historical document and 
as a contribution to experimental theater even today, thanks are due in great 
part to those who worked over the translations and to those who assisted me 
in the first stages of gathering the rare and scattered illustrative materials - 
above all, to Dr. Walter Gropius for encouraging and facilitating the project 
in many ways; to Dr. and Mrs. Gropius and Mrs. Sibyl Moholy-Nagy for their 
careful, time-consuming editing of the translation of the first Schlemmer 
and Moholy-Nagy essays; to T. Lux Feininger of Harvard and Ralph Pendle- 
ton of Wesleyan for suggestions in the translation of the Schlemmer demon- 
stration lecture; to Frau Tut Schlemmer of Stuttgart, Herbert Bayer of Aspen, 
Colorado, Alfred H. Barr, Jr., of the Museum of Modern Art and Miss Pearl 
Moeller of its Division of Museum Collections, Marcel Breuer of New York 
City, Xanti Schawinsky of New York City, and to Curators Charles Kuhn of 
the Busch-Reisinger Museum at Harvard, Jay Doblin of the Institute of De- 
sign of the Illinois Institute of Technology, and Willy Rotzler of the Zurich 
Kunstgewerbemuseum for providing or helping locate the illustrations; and 
to Clinton Atkinson, and to William Ward of Wesleyan, for suggesting the 
project in the first place and helping it through its initial stages. 
A. S. W. 
February, 1961 