The laws of organic man, on the other hand, reside in the invisible func- 
tions of his inner self: heartbeat, circulation, respiration, the activities of 
the brain and nervous system. If these are to be the determining factors, then 
their center is the human being, whose movements and emanations create 
an imaginary space. (See bottom sketch opposite. ) Cubical-abstract space is 
then only the horizontal and vertical framework for this flow. These move- 
ments are determined organically and emotionally. They constitute the 
psychical impulses (together with the mimetics of the face), which find 
expression in the great actor and in the mass scenes of great tragedy. 
lnvisibly involved with all these laws is Man as Dancer (Tanzermensch). 
He obeys the law of the body as well as the law of space; he follows his sense 
of embracing space. As the one who gives 
of himself as well as his sense 
birth to an almost endless range of expression, whether in free abstract 
movement or in symbolic pantomime, whether he is on the bare stage or in 
a scenic environment constructed for him, whether he speaks or sings, 
whether he is naked or costumed, the Tanzermensch is the medium of transi- 
tion into the great world of the theater (das grosse theatralische Geschehen). 
Only one branch of this world, the metamorphosis of the human figure and 
its abstraction. is to be outlined here. 
The transformation of the human body, its metamorphosis, is made possible 
by the costume, the disguise. Costume and mask emphasize the body's iden- 
tity or they change it; they express its nature or they are purposely misleading 
about it; they stress its conformity to organic or mechanical laws or they 
invalidate this conformity. 
The native costume, as produced by the conventions of religion, state, 
and society, is different from the theatrical stage costume. Yet the two are 
generally confused. Great as has been the variety of native costumes de- 
veloped during the course of human history, the number of genuine stage 
costumes has stayed very small. They are the few standardized costumes of 
the cornmedia dell' arte: Harlequin, Pierrot, Columbine, etc.; and they have 
remained basic and authentic to this day. 
The following can be considered fundamentally decisive in the trans- 
formation of the human body in terms of this stage costume: 