presented this project to an international gathering of writers and theater 
producers with these explanations : 
"The contemporary theater architect should set himself the aim to create 
a great keyboard for light and space, so objective and adaptable in character 
that it would respond to any imaginable vision of a stage director; a flexible 
building, capable of transforming and refreshing the mind by its spatial im- 
pact alone. 
"There are only three basic stage forms in existence. The primary one is 
the central arena on which the play unfolds itself three-dimensionally while 
the spectators crowd around concentrically. Today we know this form only as 
a circus, a bull ring, or a sports arena. 
"The second classic stage form is the Greek proscenium theater with its 
protruding platform around which the audience is seated in concentric half- 
circles. Here the play is set up against a fixed background like a relief. 
"Eventually this open proscenium receded more and more from the 
spectator, to be finally pulled back altogether behind a curtain to form today's 
deep stage which dominates our present theater. 
"Much as the spatial separation of the two different worlds, the audito- 
rium and the stage, has helped to bring about technical progress, it fails to 
draw the spectator physically into the orbit of the play; being on the other side 
of the curtain or the orchestra pit, he remains beside the drama, not in it. The 
theater is thereby robbed of one of its strongest means to make the spectator 
participate in the drama. 
"Some people believe that film and television have eclipsed the theater 
altogether, but is it not its present limited form only which is becoming 
obsolete, not the theater as such? 
"In my Total Theater . . . I have tried to create an instrument so flexible 
that a director can employ any one of the three stage forms by the use of 
simple, ingenious mechanisms. The expenditure for such an interchangeable 
stage mechanism would be fully compensated for by the diversity of purposes 
to which such a building would lend itself: for presentation of drama, opera, 
film, and dance; for choral or instrumental music; for sports events or assem- 
blies. Conventional plays could be just as easily accommodated as the most 
fantastic experimental creations of a stage director of the future. 
"An audience will shake off its inertia when it experiences the surprise 
effect of space transformed. By shifting the scene of action during the per- 