These are the possibilities of Man as Dancer, transformed through cos- 
tume and moving in space. Yet there is no costume which can suspend the 
primary limitation of the human form: the law of gravity, to which it is 
subject. A step is not much longer than a yard, a leap not much higher than 
two. The center of gravity can be abandoned only momentarily. And only 
for a second can it endure in a position essentially alien to its natural one, 
such as a horizontal hovering or soaring. 
Acrobatics make it possible to partially overcome physical limitations, 
though only in the realm of the organic: the contortionist with his double 
joints, the living geometry of the aerialist, the pyramid of human bodies. 
The endeavor to free man from his physical bondage and to heighten 
his freedom of movement beyond his native potential resulted in substituting 
for the organism the mechanical human figure (Kunstfigur) : the automaton 
and the marionette. E. T. A. Hoffmann extolled the first of these, Heinrich 
von Kleist the sec0nd.l 
The English stage reformer Gordon Craig demands: "The actor must 
go, and in his place comes the inanimate figure - the Ubermarionette we 
may call him.""nd the Russian Brjusov demands that we "replace actors 
with mechanized dolls, into each of which a phonograph shall be built." 
Such, indeed, are two actual conclusions arrived at by the stage designer 
whose mind is constantly concerned with form and transformation, with 
figure and configuration. As far as the stage is concerned, such paradoxical 
exclusiveness is less significant than the enrichment of modes of expression 
which is brought about by it. 
Possibilities are extraordinary in light of today's technological advance- 
ments: precision machinery, scientific apparatus of glass and metal, the 
1 Schlemmer's reference to the automaton is based on the story Der Sandmann from 
the Nachtstiicke of E. T. A. Hoffmann (1776-1822), where appear the mad physics 
professor Spalanzani and his "daughter" Olimpia, a machine. The characters were also 
used by Jacques Offenbach in his Tales of Hoffmann (1881). The second reference is to 
Heinrich von Kleist's (1777-1811) famous little essay Ober das Marionettentheater, a 
philosophical speculation on the essence and aesthetic implications for man of the free 
and "anti-grave" marionette. The essay is available in a translation by Eugene Jolas as 
"Essay on the Puppet Theater," Partisan Review, XIV (1943), 67-74. (Translator) 
2 Schlemmer quotes (Edward) Gordon Craig ( 1872- ) exactly; the latter speaks 
of an "Ubermarionette" in his On the Art of the Theatre (Chicago, Browne, 1911), p. 81. 
(Translator) 