obscured by the historical theory which accompanies it. He relies too much 
upon subjective statements describing his visualisation of colour and 
sound rather than upon scientific and objective exploration of optophon­
etic principles. His work is, however, valuable for having produced an 
apparatus that could also be used outside his experimental field.•) 
Despite these experiments, far too little work has so far been done in the 
field of moving light display. It must at once be tackled from many angles 
and carried forward as a pure discipline. While I value what their experi­
ments have achieved, I consider it a mistake to try, as Hirschfeld-Mack 
(see pp. So-85) and A. Laszlo do, to combine optical-kinetic with acoustic­
musical experiments. A more perfect, because scientifically grounded, per­
formance is promised by Optofonetik. The bold imagination of the 
Dadaist Raoul Hausmann, has been responsible for the first steps toward 
a future theory. ••) 
• 
Profoundly pertinent, therefore, to the problem of easel painting is. the 
other urgent question: is it right, today, in the age of moving reflected 
light phenomena and of the film, to continue to cultivate the static indi­
vidual painting as a colour composition? 
•) In contrast to the earlier theoreticians of the colour-piano, Laszlo's idea is that a colour 
has its equivalent not in one sound but in a whole complex of sounds. His colour-light 
piano is worked by a second person who projects the colours on to a screen while he him­
self keeps time upon the piano. The colour-light piano consists of an instrument panel with 
keys and stops like a harmonium, to which 4 large and 4 small projectors are fixed. The 
figures on the slides produced by the Uvachrom process represent the actual motifs, which 
are projected by means of 8 colour-prisms into the ground colours (in each of the 4 large 
projectors 8 colour-prisms) by subtractive or additive mixing. The 4 large projectors fitted 
with triple condensers are equipped with: 
r. revolving cross-frames for moving the slides vertically and horizontally, 
2. a tall cylinder between the bellows and lens to move the 8 colour-keys up and down, 
J. a dynamic (iris-) diaphragm to regulate the intensity of the light and the light-effects. 
4· a delimiting diaphragm (in front of the lens). 
The actual pictorial motifs originate in the 4 small projectors which, following existing pro­
cedures for showing slides, change and are switched on and off. 
••) Inspired by Hausmann's efforts, Walter Brinkmann has worked on the same problem. 
His description of 'audible colours' which follows will provide a fuller explanation: 'The 
22 