Anyhow, in recognition of this necessity, I have written music to accompany some of the colour-displays. 
Lamps, templets and the other auxiliaries are moved in time with the movement of the music, so that the 
temporal articulation is clearly stated by the acoustical rhythm, the optical movements as they unfold, 
contract, overlap, rise and reach climaxes, etc., are underlined and developed. 
The formal compositional means are: the moving coloured point, the line and the plane form. Each of 
these elements may be moved in the desired direction and at the desired speed, enlarged or reduced, 
projected more brightly or more darkly, with sharp or unsharp outlines, can change colour, can merge 
with other coloured forms so that optical mixtures occur at the points where the colours overlap (e.g., red 
and blue become purple). One element can be made to develop out of another, a point can become a line, 
planes may move so that the plane takes on any desired form. By using dissolving mechanism at the 
source of light and by the use of resistances we can make both single and larger complexes of coloured 
forms emerge gradually out of the black background and intensify until they reach the extreme of 
brilliance and coloured luminosity while other complexes simultaneously disappear and dissolve gradually 
into the black background. Parts of the composition may be made suddenly to appear or disappear by 
switching circuit-breakers on or off. These elementary means offer an endless wealth of variations and 
we strive to use our exact knowledge of them to achieve a fugue-like, firmly articulated colour-display, 
which shall proceed at any given time from a specific theme of coloured forms. 
We see in the reflected light-displays the powerful physical and psychical effect of the direct coloured 
beams combining with rhythmic accompanying music to evolve into a new artistic genre and also the 
proper means of building a bridge of understanding between the many who remain bewildered in the 
face of the painters' abstract pictures and the new aspirations in every other field, and the new views 
from which they have sprung. 
I reproduce these remarks verbatim but do not identify myself with them in every particular. 
L. M.- N. 
81 