the effect of the variou s (measurable) exposures and of the distance 
of the source of light from the objects, which means that 'the photog ram 
literally is the space-time -continuum' . 
The Cubists and Futurists too tal ked much of the fourth dimension, it w as 
the fashion. But Moholy as a pure thinker tried everything, including 
probing into the scientific side of this system of thought. We can hardly 
doubt that he knew the work 'Raum und Zeit' by the mathematician 
Hermann Minkowski- who had become famous in about 1909 - per­
haps through his friend El Lissitzky, w ho was astonishingly w ell-read 
and w ho explicitly mentions Minkowski's world and Riemann's theory 
of the four-dimensional continuum in the 'Europa Almanach' in 1925. 
Kepes, Moholy's colleague and successor, enquires at length into 
Minkowski in his own publications. In 'Vision and Motion' Moholy 
jokingly compares the 'delicate quality' of the space-time-continuum 
with a passage in James Joyce's 'Ulysses': 'A very short space of 
time through a very short time of space'. 
Besides light space, time, that special qua lity of the play of light with 
objects- the factor of colour- was, of course, infinitely important to 
Moholy throughout his life. The photogram could not give him colour 
and so his longing for co lour soon led him back to painting. But in his 
last yea rs he w as w orking on colour photography and he w rote : 'The 
greatest promise for the future w ill lie in mastering the colour photo­
gram'. 
Once w e establish the fact that Moholy's later discoveries are antici­
pated and pin-pointed in the Bauhaus book 'Painting, Photography, 
Film', the importance of this incunable becomes clear. Should the work 
stil l appear strange to present-day readers. the only possible advice is 
that they should immerse themselves in the story of Moholy's later life. 
Sibyl Moholy-Nagy has told it in an affecting and at the same time ex­
emplarily objective manner (Moholy- Nagy, 'Experiment in Totality', 
New York 1950). We are moved to learn how Moholy, the great artis­
tic educator, educated himself. The man w ho in his youth complained 
that Malevich used the word 'emotion' wrote shortly before his death: 
'It is the duty of the artist of today to penetrate the sti ll unrecognised 
defects of our biolog ica l function, to investi gate the new fields of t he 
industrial society and to translate the new discoveries into the stream 
of our emotions'. He said to his wife Sibyl: 'A few yea rs ago I cou ld not 
149 