But he who does not fear today to follow the path that will be unavoidable 
tomorrow is providing himself with the basis of truly creative work. 
Both in photographic art (film) and in painterly (including non-objective) 
art his clear understanding of the means permits him to respond to the 
reciprocal stimuli and thus to make full use of the means in their ever 
increasing richness and perfection. I myself have learnt from my photo­
graphic work much that is of use in my painting and conversely prob­
lems posed by my paintings have often enough provided hints for my 
photographic experiments (p. 75). It is in general true that the emer­
gence of a filmic art in colour (and sound) will compel historically based 
imitative painting to free itself with increasing confidence from the rep­
resentation of objective elements in favour of pure colour relationships; 
and the role of real or super-real or Utopian representation and repro­
duction of objects- hitherto the concern of painting- will be assumed by 
photography (film) with its exact organisation of its means. 
To try to forge a totality out of today's beginnings- both in photography 
and abstract painting- would be disastrous; and would also underrate the 
possibilities of a future synthesis, which will assuredly look different from 
anything anyone could predict today. An intuitive and logical examina­
tion of the problem enables us to observe too that a mechanical and opti­
cal art of representation in colour: colour photography or film, will produce 
results entirely different from the Lumiere and other photographs of today. 
No further trace will then remain of the kitschhaft coloured sentimentality 
of this process of dominating nature. Colour photography, like the sound­
picture and optophoneticcomposition, willstandonanentirelynew, healthy 
foundation, even if it takes r oo years of experimentation to bring this 
about. 
The possible uses of photography are already innumerable, for it will 
enable both the crudest and most delicate effects of light-value - also, 
when further advances have been made, colour-value-to be fixed. Inter alia 
in the form of: 
records of situations, of reality; (p.86-gr) 
combination, projection of images on top of one another and 
side by side; 
penetration; compression of scenes to make them manageable: 
super~reality, Utopia and humour (here is the newwitl);(p. roo-ros) 
35 