position. A continuous and progressive development of photography and 
the film will soon show that these techniques enable us to fulfil represen­
tational purposes incomparably more completely than painting as it has 
been known hitherto could ever do. Although no general understanding 
of the situation as yet exists, this intuitive comprehension, rooted as it is 
in the sensibility of the age, has, with other factors•) greatly aided the ad­
vance of 'non-objective', 'abstract' painting. 
A 'non-objective' painter needs no special courage to embrace the art of 
creative presentation as provided today by photography and the film. 
Man's interest in getting to know the whole world has been enlarged by 
the feeling of being- at every moment- in every situation- involved in 
it. We cannot therefore express hostility towards representational art but 
must demand that in conformity with our interest in and feeling for the 
world at large, up-to-date consequences are drawn: that painterly 
methods of representation suggestive merely of past times and past 
ideologiesshalldisappearand their place betaken by mechanical means 
of representation and their as yet unpredictable possibilities of 
I 
extension. In such a situation the discussion about objective and non­
objective painting will cease to be important; the whole problem will have 
to be comprised in absolute and (not 'or' but and) representational 
optical creation. 
•) 'With other factors' in this context signifies a special field intimately embedded in the 
whole temporal and spiritual condition of the world or, in less pretentious terms: the cul­
tural situation of the moment. One such factor, for example- as it will be of some import­
ance to recognise- is that the interplay of various facts has caused our age to shift almost 
imperceptibly towards colourlessness and grey: the grey of the big city, of the black and 
white newspapers, of the photographic and film services; the colour-eliminating tempo 
of our life today. Perpetual hurry, fast movement, cause all colours to melt into grey. Or­
ganised grey-relationships, the living relationships of chiaroscuro, will, of course, emerge 
later on as a new aspect of the biological-optical experience of colour. Intensive examination 
of photographic means will certainly contribute much to this. In view of these contingencies, 
we shall need to bring still greater readiness and care to sovereign creation in colour, if we 
wish to prevent the atrophying of our optical organs. 
15 