today, if not impossible, to reconstruct the stages by which old paintings 
came into being. All the same, with the aid of the concept 'absolute 
painting', we can distinguish a number of the components; and especially 
the components which derive from elementary states of tension and from 
form as determined by time . 
• 
During the course of his cultural development man has unceasingly en­
deavoured to master problems and to use them to express himself (to 
communicate, to depict). The desire somehow to hold fast the natural 
phenomena of his environment and the imaginings of his mind has opera­
ted with special intensity. Without examining the biological or other 
reasons for the genesis of the picture (art-historical interpretations of the 
use of symbols, attainment of power through the act of mastery, etc.), 
we can say that man has with ever mounting joy conquered the image of 
reality transposed into colours and forms and the content of fantasy 
caught in a pictorial rendering. Even the elementary states of tension of 
the colours and light values which in primitive phases of culture ordinarily 
appeared and were organised in other ways (garments, domestic imple­
ments, etc.) are here imbued with intensity. In this way the primal imi­
tative urges have been enormously heightened for they touch also upon the 
elementary biological basis. 
Development in every field of creation has led man to concentrate upon 
establishing means exclusively appropriate to the work. Extreme mastery 
_ and extreme inventiveness have been displayed in bringing out what is 
essential and elementary, in discovering basic constellations and organis­
ing them. Thus painting too came to recognise its elementary means: 
colour and plane. This recognition has been aided by the invention of the 
mechanical process of representation: photography. People have discovered 
on the one hand the possibility of representing,in an objective, mechani­
cal manner, the effortless crystallising out of a law stated in its own 
medium; on the other hand it has become clear that colour composition 
carries its 'subject' within itself, in its colour. 
Natural objects, material subjects: these arbitrary bearers of moments of 
colour are not needed today for the unambiguous effect of colour com-
14 