art, but not art on a pedestal. Art is a conzmunity 1natter transcend­
ing the limitations of specialization. It is the most intimate lan­
guage of the senses, indispensable for the individual in society. 
Its function is to be a seismograph of the relationships of the 
individual to the world, intuitive re-creation of the balance between 
the emotional, intellectual and social existences of the individual. 
Everywhere in the world, since about 1910, young artists have 
tried to understand this. They searched for the best way to express 
themselves, to solve the problems which painting, sculpture, writ­
ing, composition brought to them. They did not search for "art" 
but for sincere expression. Intuitively they returned to the funda­
mentals of their media-the painter to color and light, the sculptor 
to volume, the architect to space, the composer to tone, the writer 
to the word. Their work opens the way to the lost emotional sen­
sorial sources and to a kind of socio-biology of the human being. 
But yet there is a great lag in the people's mind concerning the 
benefits of this approach. 
Nothing more surprising has happened in the life of a nation, ex­
cept perhaps in Russia, than the establishing of the Federal Art 
Project in the United States of America. Though it started as a part 
of the Social Security Act of the WP A it grew in a very short time 
beyond this relief aspect. The Federal Art Project gave the country 
a new valuation of the arts, badly needed as the pioneers bringing 
civilization over a continent with audacity and hard physical work 
could not see in the arts for a long time anything but luxury. The 
Federal Art Project broke down this fallacy. It represented a gigan­
tic educational work, not in the sense that it "brought art to the 
people" or created art for the people, but that it tried to anchor it 
in, with, among, and of the people. 
Since the Federal Art Project is liquidated, a greater responsi­
bility lies with the educators of this country than ever before. It is 
up to them to see that art should be a part of life. This could be 
done early, but not as a timetable subject segregated from the 
other branches of the curriculum, but as an interpenetrating reality 
with all of them. 
If the unity of art can be established with all the subject matters 
taught and exercised, then a real reconstruction of this world could 
be hoped for-more balanced and less dangerous. 
21 
Introduction 