land, built a few years earlier (1512) (fig. 166), show how rapidly continuous 
benches came into use. 
No piece of the Italian Renaissance has reached us in such variety and number 
as the chest or cassone." These are no serial articles. They are works of art, 
created for weddings and h'ke occasions. Famous artists decorated cassoni. 
Florentines such as Paolo Uccello, Botticelli, Ghirlandajo, Andrea del Sarte; 
North I telians, such as Mantegna, Cossa, Carpaccio. The Florentine cassoni 
are especially precious for what they tell us of the private life and literary 
interest of the time. They are display pieces. 
This medieval tradition runs to seed in the sixteenth century when sarcophagus 
shapes are enveloped in a pompous technique by the woodcarver's knife and 
treated in a way suited only to marble. Another factor hastened the end of this 
tradition: the growing stability of life. Increasingly stable types arose for the 
lay interior. They remained wed to the house, having to wander no more. 
The Drawer 
An element appears in the fifteenth century that is indissolubly linked with 
the later development of furniture, and largely takes over the containing duties 
of the chest: this device is the drawer. Henri Havard painstakingly attempts 
11 
to lay open its origins.
Our knowledge nevertheless remains fragmentary. One eannot be far mistaken 
in tracing the origin of the drawer to Flanders or Burgundy, centers that set 
12 
the standard in the fifteenth century's growing concern with comfort.
13 
A notably early piece was preserved in the sacristy of the cathedral at Breslau 
(fig. 149). It is a huge oaken cubinet for preserving records within the church. 
Well-known pieces of this kind, as that of Bayeux Cathedral, survive from an 
earlier period. They have rows of small doors. In the German document cup-
lu Paul Schuhrig, Cwsoni, Truhen und Truhenbilder der !tal. Renaissance, Leip7ig, 1924. 
nIts history is a C'...omplicated one. The French word liroir, according to Havard, entered the language 
in the seventeenth century. Prior to that time the drawer was termed layette or Heile, and by 1471 we 
find designated, in an inventory of Hugers Castle 'une armoire a deux gichets et a une laiete, un pupitre 
paint a deux liettes qui se tirent.' Shortly afterwards, in 14.83, mention is made of 'un petit cofi're de bois 
plat a plusiers lietes.' Towards the end of the sixteenth century mentious of its uses become more numer­
ous: in buffets, small tables, dressers, Havard, op.cit. vol. IV, co1.1329; vol. III, col. 287. 
12 The original meaning of the word layette confirms this. Havard (op.cit. vol. III, col. 290) points out 
that in Burgundy the word laiete designates 'la partie de la veine pierreuse entre Ia couche et lemur,' so 
that the original name of the drawer may have been taken from masonry. 
n Later in the Diozesan Museum, Breslau. This cupboard hears 'an inscription in large minuscules, 
the capitals being reminiscent of the initials of the early printers: Anno dni mcccclv D[omin]us Joes 
Paschkowiez Canonicus p[rae]c[e]ntor ae m[a]g[iste]r fab[ri}c[a]e ecdie hac almaiar comparauit et constat 
35 Flor. de pr[opr]iis.' Cf. also A. Lutsch, Die Kunstdenkmiiler der Stadt Breslau, Breslau, 1886. Illus­
trated in Dr. H. Luchs, ed., Schlesiens Vorzeit tn Bild und &hrift, Breslau, 1872, vol. II, p. 97. Professor 
E. Scheyer, Detroit, called our attention to this significant piece and kindly furnished the bibliographical 
indications. 
276 