296. 'Train ImpCrial' 
Presented to Napoleon 
HI by the Compagnie 
de Chemin de Fer de 
l'Est, 1357. 'Diningw 
room car.' In the 'fif­
ties, dining cars were 
for none but potentates. 
The Emperor is presid­
ing over a large table 
plm:;ed in the center. 
Around it, liveried ai­
fendanls serve the ruler 
and his suite. (L'lllus­
tration, Paris, 1857) 
keen for new inventions. 'Vhat he claimed was a particular arrangement and 
combination. Still nncertain of the trend, he patented two distinct combina­
tions. Could he risk a dining car having no sleeping accommodation, or was 
it advisable to unite both facilities into a single type? The 'hotel-car' of 1869 
(fig. 297) is still a sleeping car, with a small kitchen built in at one end. The 
details are not specified. It was the type, the combination, that Pullman was 
anxious to protect. This hotel car was interesting for a further reason: 'My 
improvements are designed to provide a convenient car in which passengers, 
and especially families, may ride, eat, and sleep.' The other end of the car held 
the privileged, segregated cabins. These Pullman described in detail and referred 
to as 'state-rooms.' Only a narrow passageway le<l around them; the common 
aisle was done away with. They were for the traveler who desired privacy. It 
was the first appearance in America of a preferred section set apart within the 
car. It meant further differentiation in favor of a class system. 
His other combination (fig. 297), the 'improved dining-car ... intended to 
be used as a travelling dining-saloon and restaurant,' forewent sleeping accom~ 
modations altogether, but the sleeping car still dominated its pattern, as Pull­
man himself allowed: 'The seats are arranged transversely, and so as to face 
each other, as in the sectiom of a sleeping-car.' Still lacking were the chairs 
that Napoleon had in his dining car of 1857. The table was moved to the seats, 
not the seats to the table, 'one end of which is supported by a leg ... while the 
4-64 