bakery of the Mouchot brothers in Paris (figs. 92, 93) won continental fame. It 
used the latest hot-air ovens and large efficient kneading machines. These 
kneaders were driven by a tread wheel, as used in the Renaissance and in the 
municipal bakeries of Genoa in the late eighteenth century. The wheel was 
suspended outside the baking room and was trodden by well-drilled dogs. When 
the kneader had completed the necessary revolutions and the mixing was com­
pleted, a whistle automatically blew and the animals ceased their labor. The 
Dew aerotherme ovens were heated by coke (fig. 92), which was 50 per cent 
33 
cheaper and offered greater 'production capacity.' Two bake ovens turned 
mt 6240 kilograms of bread in 24 hours. The gas used to illuminate this cellar 
bakery was manufactured by the ingenious baker himself. 
In England at this time one could have found no Renaissance tread wheels 
for bread making. In 1850 a mechanism was put into operation in Glasgow," 
which was said to manufacture one and a half tons of bread an hour, or approx­
imately four times as much as the Paris bakery of the Mouchot brothers. This 
was a bread factory packed within a few square yards. Everything was auto­
matic and concentrated in one machine. A fly-wheel regulator, as used in steam 
engines, controlled the flow of flour and water into the mixer; rotary or sliding 
knives cut the dough into pieces which were mechanically molded into loaves 
and propelled into the oven. This bread factory in miniature recalls those queer 
musical contrivances that unite a whole orchestra in one instrument. But this 
grotesque scheme embraced two ingenious ideas: coiled pipes were used to heat 
two of its four baking chambers, and soda water to saturate the dongh. In 
France this device would have been unthinkable, for the people would never 
have accepted such bread. Nor did it enjoy much success in England. It is one 
of the starting points, however, for more refined methods. 
Bread and Gas 
To make the dough tasty and porous, two kinds of ferment were generally 
used: leaven and yeast. In bread making with leaven, some of the dough from 
one baking is set aside and used for the next. The leaven acts as a sort of starter. 
It yields a full-bodied and tasty bread, with the slightly sour aroma that many 
35 
people still prefer. Leaven was used throughout the Middle Ages, and long 
after. The Italians still insist on leaven for their white bread, the Germans 
for their mixed rye breads," the Russians for their black breJ~d. 
:!:! Detailed description in C. H. Schmidt, op.cit. pp,320ff. 
3
~ G. A. Robinson and R. E. Lee, Manufacture of bread, British Patent No. 12703, 10 July 1849. 
35 
Some modern authorities seem to prefer leaven. L. Boutroux, in Le Pain ct la panification, considers 
bread mafle with leaven more healthful than that made with yeast, beeause the acids it contains aid in 
its digestion. Quoted in Emil Braun, The Baker's Book, New York, 1903, p.52. 
oo Pumperniekel and Schwarzhrot. 
180 