Flour in Mass Production 
The flour used by bakers today has a whiteness far exceeding that of 1850. 
This whiteness is not the re1>ult of adulteration with foreign substances (alum, 
copper sulphate, etc.), hut of a revolutionized milling process. The millstones 
crushe,d the grain in such manner as to mix inseparably at the frrst milling most 
of the components of the berry, the starchy interior, the nutritious layer of 
gluten cells, and the valuable oily germ or embryo. The oily substance of the 
germ penetrated the mixture, making it oily to the touch and frequently unpleas足
ant in appearance. Moreover, there was the risk that 1he oily ingredients would 
turn rancid in prolonged storage. In this low or flat grinding process, the mill足
stones with their sharp grooves were set as close together as possible. 
The millstones, which crushed the grain as small as possible at the first milling, 
are now replaced by rollers, relatively far apart, which squeeze the grain far 
more gradually. This 'high grinding' is performed in stages. After every passage 
through rollers, the grain is separated by sifting machines into its various com足
ponents. The process is repeated four, six, eight, ten times. 
When did this begin? 
The gradual reduction of the wheat into flour by means of rollers was called 
the 'Hungarian system.' Although France and other countries worked on this 
process, it was systematically developed in a country having much wheat and 
a fondness for elaborate pastries requiring extra fine flour- Hungary. This 
57 
took place between 1834 and 1373. In America the transformation of the mill足
ing process was carried out between 1870 and 1880 in the wheat-growing Middle 
West (Minneapolis). It had hegrm in the late 'sixties with attempts to separate 
58 
the thin glutinous middlings surrounding the kernel. 
The year 1871 brought a cleaner, such as the French had sought around 1860, 
by which a hitherto poor grade of wheat could he made to yield the most highly 
priced flour. Minnesota flour was the outcome of this 'new purifying process,' 
popularly known as the 'new process.' 'Minnesota fancy reigned supreme in 
every market in which it was introduced as the sharpest, whitest, brightest 
61 
This 'Hungarian system' was developed in Budapest. between 1334. and 1873, chiefly by three Swiss 
inventors: in 1834 by Jacob Sulzberger, in 1850 by Abraham Ganz, who introduced chill('.-d iron rollers, 
and finally in 1873 by Friedrich Wegmann, who used smooth, automatically regulated porcelain rollers. 
(Cf. Wilhelm Glauner, Die Hutorische Entwicklnng der Miillerei, Munich, Berlin, 1939.) The rollers are 
typical shelved inventions. But it took them two and a half centuries to be developed from Ramelli's 
portable roller-mill (1583) into a machine. In the eighteenth century, various proposals of this sort, 
mostly for household use, arc found in France and in England. As in the entir~l field of breadmaking, 
numerous attempts were made in the 'twenties, but led to no satisfactory solution. 
58 
Charles B. Kuhlmann, DeJ1elnpmenl of lhe Flour-Milling Indu::try in ihe United Stales, Boston, 1929, 
pp.ll5ff. 
188 