typical were the results of a contest 'for the average small family house' spon­
sored by the Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company and the architectural journal, 
Pencil Points (May 1945): it was won hy an architect who took the mechanical 
201 
core as his point of departure. On one side of the 'mechanicorc,' which is to 
be picked up from the factory, he attaches living quarters, and on the other 
side sleeping quarters. This produces an H-shaped plan, in which the mechan­
ical core forms the cross-tie; but tbis mechanized connecting element tends 
rather to draw the sleeping and living quarters apart, as if lodged in two distinct 
houses (fig. 441). 
The industry-sponsored conte,sts encourage the younger generation to develop 
their ideas, if only on paper. The question we are dealing with here is crucial 
to the future organization of the house and indeed to the very manner of living. 
Whether the mechanical core will he dissected into its components or gathered 
into a single unit has not yet become clear. And it is not certain whether the 
mechanical core will find its use in one-family houses or in large apartment build­
ings, the design of which, in America, is still in the hands of routineers. 
Industry, produce as it will, is not suited to solve the problem of the mechan­
ical core. The question is far to deeply interwoven with the organism of the 
house. It is a task for the American architects. Comparing the helplessness 
with which the architectonic idiom was used in the 1935 General Electric Com­
petition, to the familiarity with which it was handled and taken for granted in 
1945, one sees that the younger generation has caught up. The American arcbi­
tects seem called upon to provide the next step in the development. They have 
the longest experience with mechanical installations and have at hand the most 
highly developed industry, even if their influence upon production is extremely 
limited. Yet tbings can change rapidly in this respect, as the gaining influence 
of the industrial designer has shown. What matters is to domesticate mecha­
nization, rather than to let the mechanical core tyrannize the house. 
20
' J, B. and N. Fletcher, Birmingham (Mich.). Their house is intended for a returning soldier of World 
War II: 'First he goes to the factory to get the "mechanicore" which has all the latest conveniences, 
and then to the mill for lumber . .. .' Pencil Points, May 1945, pp.56-7. 
627 