the early nineteenth century; it centers around the city which European observers 
up to the 'fifties deemed the westernmost point in which settlement was safe. 
Cincinnati lies on the Ohio River, the most abundant tributary of the Missis­
sippi, about half way between tbe industrial city of Pittsburgh and the con­
fluence of the two rivers. The river was to Cincinnati what the railroads later 
became to Chicago, its life artery; the South was the natural consumer; the 
export trade passed through New Orleans. Throughout the period of Cincin­
nati's rise- the peak was reached toward mid-century-- there existed no 
convenient mode of transportation to the consumer-centers in the East. 
The products were ahnost worthless at first, even in Cincinnati. 'I have 
10 
referred to the remarkable fact,' says Charles Cist, historian of Cincinnati, in 
1866, 'that there was a period in the West when corn would not, in some sections, 
command six cents per bushel, and in others was of so little value as to he sub­
stituted for wood as fuel.' 
In the effort to absorb an abundant corn crop, Cincinnati resorted to con­
densing it in the form of whisky or hogs. Tbc broadness of the land made it 
possible to let the hogs run in the woods: tD feed on acorns and beech-nuts 'until 
five or six weeks of killing time, when they are turned into the corn field to 
11 
fatten.' Production figures soon reached a height that seemed no less extraor­
dinary tD European eyes than did the method of raising the animals. 'Some 
of these farmers drive in one season as high as one thousand head of hog into 
12 
their fields; from 150 to 300 are the more common numbers, however.' 
This led directly to overproduction. The packing industry could not cope 
with the entire bulk of material produced. Here, very early, appears a symptom 
that in the course of the century becomes ever more conspicuous in American 
life: surplus production and its artificial dissipation. While first appearing in 
the agricultural domain and in relatively sparsely populated districts, it was 
later imparted to nearly all branches of production hy a highly intensified 
industry. 
When the large-scale industrialization of meaL production set in, surplus pro­
duction led Cincinnati to use only the most valuable parts and to throw the 
remainder into the river: 
Not less extraordinary is the fact, within the knowledge of hundreds now in Cincinnati, 
that in the early ages of pork packing, say in 1828, there was so little demand for any 
1
° Charles Cist, 'The hog and its products,' Commissioner of Agriculture Report, 1866, p.391. 
n Charles Cist, quoted in C. F. Goss, Cincinnati, the Queen City, 1788-1912, Chicago, 1912, 4 vols.; 
vol. 2, p.334. 
"Ibid. 
215 