220. Apparel of the Ruling Taste: The New Ideal Bustle, 
1880's. ('l'rade card, courtesy Bella C. Landauer Collec­
tion, New-York If£gforical S'oeiely) 
Upholstered Easy Chairs- Confortables: These examples should suffice to 
indicate the trend. Most of the models appearing on the market rapidly passed 
away. Some stayed with an undeniable longevity. Such were the upholstered 
easy chairs known as confortables (fig. 223). Their characteristics are a skeleton 
entirely cloaked and enveloped in fabric, and voluminous cushions, usually built 
around spiral springs. The origin of the widespread category can be traced to 
Louis Philippe's time. We even know the name of the Parisian upholsterer who 
first covered the entire chair with fabric, and for what reason he did so. 
'From 1838 we can attest the existence of those arm-chairs known as con­
fortables. It was Dervilliers, an upholsterer of that time, who replaced the ber­
11 
geres with chairs upholstered over springs.' This was the signal for a line of 
chairs and sofas so long and varied as to defy enumeration. All are built around 
spiral springs. 'Confortahle' was the name that Dervilliers gave to his new 
78 
'elastic arm-chair' first exhibited in 1834. Its woodwork was still visible and 
not yet cloaked in fabric. Its feet stood free. 
11 Deville, op.cit, p.21. Havard, op.dt. vol. 1, col. 581, accepts this indication. 
1s The report on the Paris exposition of 1834 contains this remark: 'Les fauteuils Nastiques de M. 
Derville IHavard and Deville spell the name otherwise}, a Paris, qu'il quulifie de conforlables, nous ont 
paru Clegants tout ala fois et tri\'1 commodes, sans que leur prix suit <1 beuueoup pr1\s t:msr;i lilev{~ que celui 
des meubles du mCme genre qui nous avaient Ctl~ envoy{$ d'abord d'Angleterre et de l'Allernagne. C'est a 
se rendre de tels que s'en Ctudiait longtemps cet CbCniste-t.apissier.' Maske lnduslriel, description complNe 
de l'Cxposilion des produits de l'induslriefranr;aisefails en 1831, Paris, 1834, vol. :1, p.159. 
:176 