late types within their respective spheres. The selfactor reaches standard form 
around 1830; the reaper, completed hy its acceBsory mechanisms, around 1880. 
These dates mark the time interval between the mechanization of spinning and 
the mechanization of agriculture. 
The reaper in many respects seems the more crucial of the two. Rapid har­
vesting is a necessity; it must go ahead as soon as the grain is ripe and the weather 
favorable. Here the intervention of a mechanism, instead of the need to call iu 
helpers at the last moment, brings a double benefit. 
REAPING 
In 1783 the 'Society for the Encouragement of Arts' in London offered a 
golden medal for 'inventing a machine to answer the purpose of mowing or 
reaping wheat, rye, harley, oats or beans, hy which it may be done more expedi­
tiously, and cheaper. . . . The machine with certificates that at least three 
acres have heen cut hy it, to he produced to the Society on or before the second 
Tuesday in November 1783. . . . Simplicity and cheA~pness in the construction 
47 
will he considered as principal parts of merit.' 
Jethro Tull devoted his fortune and fanaticism to the improvement of agri­
culture and the realization of his drill (1701) and horse-drawn cultivator (1716). 
In 1732 the first threshing machine made its appearance, which, when the 
Society of Arts held its contest half a century later (1783), had already heen 
48 
given essential improvements, and had become a practical instrument.
Why should not reaping by machine he like;wise possible? Pliny's description 
of the Gaulisb header, which plucked off the ears and left the straw standing, 
had appeared in English and French translation and was generally known. 
The Society of Arts demanded more: The machine should lay the swathes 'in 
49 
such a manner as may he easily gathered up for binding.' 
For a time nothing workable was offered. 
Yet in the last years of the eighteenth century a time of intensive invention 
50 
set in, which created important, even if unexploited, mechanisms. 
How might the motion of the hand be supplanted? The English washing 
machines of that time attempted, as we later shall see, to find mechanisms that 
would directly imitate the rubbing and pressing of the hand. The reapers, from 
47 
Transactions of lhe Royal Society of Arts, vol. I, p.l07 (1783). 
48 
The first truly practical machine was invented by the Scot Andrew Meikle, in 1786. The stationary 
thresher, powered by oxen, was the first mechanical implement to become popular on the farm. 
9 
4 Transactions, op.cit., vol. I, p.107. 
50 
Bennett, Woodcraft, Specifications of Engfish Patenlsfor Reaping Machinr-$, London, 1853; 1'he Evo!.u~ 
tion of the Reaping Machine in the United Slates, Dept. of Agriculture, Office of Experimentation Bulletin 
no. 103, Washington, 1902; William T. Hutchinson, Cyrus llall McCormick, New York-London, 1835, 
pp.49-73. 
150 