By the time of Napoleon's coronation, the Empire style was well under way. 
In 1801, in the Collected Interior Decorations issned by Percier and Fontaine, 
the signs of Empire style are fully developed. 
To what works did Napoleon apply his architects? 
There was no respite for building. Napoleon's projects were many, hut those 
executed were disappointingly few. Hoping to found a new dynasty, he had a 
tremendous palace designed for his son, the King of Rome (1810). It is as well 
that Percier and Fontaine's plans remained unexecuted. They were as dead as 
the problem to he solved. 
The one large-scale architectural project they carried out was the building 
3 
of the Rue de Rivoli, open on one side to the Tuileries. Minds disciplined 
enough for such tasks of city planning, which became the spring-stones for 
Haussmann's later transformation of Paris, were no mere decorators. 
Napoleon applied his architects to remodeling, to festival decorations, and 
to the numerous knickknacks that were the fashion under the Empire. The 
stress laid on festivals and ceremonies serving Napoleon's prestige appears in 
the two albums issued by Percier and Fontaine to commemorate Napoleon's 
coronation hy the Pope (1804) and his marriage to Marie Louise of Ilahshurg 
(1810).' 
Percier and Fontaine's greatest influence was upon the interior. 'Percier 
was the inspirer of everything produced to make a setting worthy of the Emperor. 
And the activity of these two artists enabled them to leave their hallmark on the 
5 
slightest object of the imperial household.' There were also the luxury objects 
that Napoleon liked to have around him: vases, services, bronze candelabra 
(lustres), as well as the jewelry that played so important a role. A special Service 
de Cadeaux provided gifts to foreign sovereigns. Percier's hand is everywhere 
to be found. 
This combination of the entrepreneur, or engineer type, Fontaine, with the 
artist, Percier, is often repeated in the course of the nineteenth century. The 
abolishing of the guilds, the tearing down of harriers between the various crafts, 
was the postulate for enterprises such as were undertaken so early by the firm 
of Percier and Fontaine. 
Percier and Fontaine, and the Empire style they created in all its ramifica­
tions, yield the key to an understanding of the nineteenth century. They are 
3 
Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture, Cambridge, 1941. 
4 
Percier, Fontaine, and lsabey, Sacre et couronnemenl de Napoleon, empereur des franr;ais el roi d'llalie, 
Paris, 1807; Percier and Fontaine, Le Mariage deS. Majestk l'Empereur avec S.A.I l'archiduchesse Marie 
Louise d'Autriche, Paris, 1810. 
5
E. Hes...:;ling, Dessins d'orf?:vrerie de Percier conserves ala Bibliotheque de l'Union centrale des Arts 
Decoratifs de Paris, n.d. 
335 