to be taken sitting and vapor baths to be taken lying (fig. 460). They often bad 
ingenious shower facilities. The sitz bath consisted of a stool and a frame to 
carry the steam-tight curtain. Only the bather's head emerged. The principle 
had been used in English patents of the eighteenth century, as well as in the 
wooden sweat boxes of medieval times. The baths to be taken lying were made 
in both frxed and portable models. The steam-bed baths, developed at the start 
of the century, enjoyed perennial favor." 
Around 1880 Arnold Hikli, originator of the atmospheric bath, constructed 
such a steam-bed bath for days when perspiration could not be induced by the 
heat of the sun. 'This portable steambatb,' its English pamphlet claims, 'bas 
the great advantage over the Russian or the Turkish bath that it can be taken 
in any room, that it leaves the head free and allows the lungs fresh air to breathe 
... and has the advantage of Pricssnitz's dry packing in so far as it takes much 
67 
less time.' The folding types were constructed on the principle of the folding 
bed. The tub swings down from an upright eontainer. Various showers were 
generally used in connection with it. In the United States, from the 'seventies 
to the end of the century, this folding type was most popular as a bathtub. To 
take a late example, Montgomery Ward's 1894-5 catalogue offers a wide range of 
folding baths, which often tuck the tub, as well as the heater, into a wardrobe. 
Here the folding models outnumber the non-folding ones. Their prices range 
between $20 and $60, according to quality and workmanship. 'A handsome piece 
of furniture of modern style (Antique or Sixteenth Century) and is as perfect 
in operation as a folding bed.' The gasoline heater is housed within the ward­
robe, and when in use acts as a counterweight to prevent the container from 
capsizing onto the bather. The tub being folded back after use, the heater 
nestles in its hollow (fig. 474). How to dispose of the used water is a problem 
that each must solve as best he may. At any rate, the apparatus turns into a 
'in modern style.' The whole contrivance, with its mixture 
mirrored wardrobe 
of technical lameness and false front, falls within the perilous regions of mimicry. 
Domestic vapor baths were much used during the second half of the century. 
And understandably so, for they called for no running-water supply. An incon­
spicuous spirit lamp, as supplied with the model of 1832, sufficed to generate the 
steam. From time to time, down to the end of the century, the popular maga­
zines advertise further, and often grotesque, proposals. Normally these home 
vapor baths, like that of 1830, consist of a rudimentary steam unit and a shell 
to channel the steam around the bather's body. The inventors show dismaying 
UTJ.S. Patent 13,467,21 Aug. 1855 (fig. 4.61). 
57 
Dr. Arnold Rikli'.~ Physico-llydriatic Establishment for the cure of chronic diseases at Veldes, Oberkrain, 
Austria, Trieste, 1881, p.41. 
666 