him. Thus deeply rooted in the word for furniture, meu.ble, is the idea of the 
movable, the transportable. 
Easily transportable, the chest was the most common furniture of the Middle 
Ages. It formed the basic equipment and almost the main element of the me­
dieval interior. It. was the container for all movable belongings. No other me­
dieval piece has come, down to us in such numbers. Chests could at the same time 
be used as trunks. In them the household goods were ready packed. One was 
always prepared to take off. 
People left only such things as were too bulky to move. Hence the creation 
of compact and, preferably, collapsible furniture. This transportable, collapsible 
furniture, as for instance the folding X-chairs, were used long before chairs in 
the modern sense. No lack of space produced these faldstools, collapsible and 
demountable tables, and trussing beds, but as the name indicates, the prospect 
of rapid folding, trussing, and loading. 
The political chaos of the time is manifest in its nomadic furniture. Not only 
the traffic of merchants was imperiled, or the nobility whose feuds were never 
stilled; but whole states and their rulers were caught up in the general insecurity. 
Six successive transfers of the French capital took place under the last Valois 
king. Charles VII, miraculously aided in his coronation by Joan of Arc, was 
kept ever on the move as be fled from the English in the final phase of the Hun­
dred Years' War (1340-1453). He held temporary courts at Bourges, Poitie.rs, 
and Chinon. 
The Chest as Universal Furniture 
While the Homanesque churches were being raised in all their complexities 
of vaulting and tower construction, everyday life was still very primitive. 
The mid-twelfth century might cover the Hoyal Portal of Chartres with 
figures great in force and conception, symbolizing the triumph and eternal reign 
of Jesus Christ. The glass paintings in the constructions of the roses and win­
dows are unsurpassed in expression and in the intensity of their colors. Yet, 
at the same period, chests set up in the churches to collect money for the Cru­
sades were mere tree trunks, roughly chopped, chiseled, and bumed out. Their 
lids were coarse, heavy boards. 
This return to the hollowed-tree container suggests how primitive was all the 
rest of the medieval interior. Hollowed-out tree trunks were often set on end 
for the storage of cerejj.]s, fruit, and other provisions. Fire-hollowed tree trunks 
were nsed for holding stores by the American colonists of the seventeenth century 
and even later. We can surely recogaize them as descendants of the. old type. 
273 