THE CONSTITUENT :FURNITURE OF THE TWENTIETH 
CENTURY 
Furniture and Its Shapers 
UNTIL around the end of the fifteenth century, carpenters fitted the woodwork 
of the house. They were succeeded by the joiners, and in the seventeenth cen­
tury, hy the cabinetmakers- men skilled in the working of fine woods, dex­
trous handlers of inlay and veneer. 
The nineteenth century pnt the decorator in charge. The Empire setting, 
elaborated by Napoleon's designers, Percier and Fontaine, opened the way for 
the upholsterer. Increasingly the upholsterer became master of the ruling taste. 
Only in American patent furniture did the engineer and the mechanic exert 
their influence. 
Thns from medieval tinies, the artisans have followed one another as creators 
of furniture: carpenter, joiner, cabinetmaker, decorator-upholsterer, mechanic­
engrneer. 
The 'Craftsman' 
In England, parallel in tinie with the American patent-furniture movement, 
a revolt was growing against the machine. This revolt had nothing in common 
with the patent-furniture movement. It was a protest against the first stages 
of mechanization, of which England was feeling the effect hy 1850. The circle 
around William Morris, with John Ruskin in its background, gained an influence 
that ultimately spread to the Continent and to America. This was at the tnrn 
of the century. With the arts and crafts movement, as carried on hy William 
Morris's British followers, who demanded furniture and interiors 'intended to 
he the expression of an individuality,' a new figure came to the fore: the 
craftsman. 
The movement, spreading to the Continent and to AmericA around 1900, 
did not bring identical results everywhere. On both sides of the Atlantic, it 
looked to Ruskin and William Morris as patrons, and was of marked literary 
hent. In America it advocated 'the simplification of daily life and a more reason­
able way of living.' It advocated country houses, often sound in detail. It 
advocated self-sufficiency: 'a pleasant comfortable dwelling situated on a piece 
1 
of ground large enough to yield a great part of the food for the family.' Self­
sufficiency, as a reaction against mass production, was to he urged again later 
hy Fraak Lloyd Wright. 
1 
Gustave Stickley, Craftsman Homes, New York, 1909, p.202. 
482 