vacant space beueath J. J. P. Omfs working surfaces. Before we pass on to 
the organization of the work process around 1935 and to the development that 
ensued, we shall seek typological insight into the appliances prevailing in the 
mechanized kitchen. 
Mechanization of the Hearth 
The Range: Concentration of the lleut Sonrce 
The history of the kitchen us we know it today is largely hound up with the 
growing concentration of its heat sources. The open flame of the hearth, coal 
within the cast-iron range, gas, and finally electricity followed one another as 
the heating agents. Their eras were of unequal length. For ages, the open 
flame reigned supreme. During a half century between 1830 and 1880, the cast­
iron range became prevalent. Between 1330 and 1930, the gas range won accept­
ance. Then, in ever rising tempo, began the era of the electric range. We are 
speaking here of things in flux, not of rigid dates. The different forms compete 
side hy side, and before a heating agent triumphs it must usually pass through a 
prolonged incubation period. 
The open fire, the flame in the hearth, ran through the ages. Until late in 
the seventeenth century it was often the sole heating agent in.the cold season. 
The chimneys of colonial times, whose stone blocks formed the heavy backbone 
of the house, are some measure of the tradition's vigor. In the large Gothic 
households, at the Burgundian court, or in the lordly castles, several fireplaces 
might be united in a kitchen building, as at. Dijon or the royal palace of 
Cintra in Portugal. Their flues, meeting in a conical vault, formed the domi­
nant of the architectural complex. 
Only in the fifteenth century, with the awakening of a burgher consciousness, 
did the kitchen become a separate room of the house. But even into the seven­
teenth century it often served as the burgher dining room, 'often as the bed­
28 
room too,' and occasionally as a social chamber . It was a neatly kept place 
and its rows of coppers became the display pieces that so often glow in the 
Dutch little-masters of the seventeenth century. A drawing ascribed to Jerome 
28 
Havard, Dicti:Onnaire de l'ameublemsni et de la decoration depuis le Xllle siCcle jusqu'O. nos jours, 
vol. r, col. 1132. 
527 