FOREWORD 
IN Space, Time and Architecture (1941) I attempted to show the split that exists 
in our period between thought and feeling. I am trying now to go a step further: 
to show how this break came about, by investigating one important aspect of our 
life - mechanization. 
At the origin of the inquiry stood the qesire,tq understand the effects of mech足
anization upon the human being; to discer~ how far mechanization corresponds 
with and to what extent it contradicts the unalterable laws of hmuan nature. 
The question of the limits of mechanization is bound to arise at any moment, as 
the human aspect, which is fundamental, cannot he disregarded. 
The coming period has to reinstate basic human values. It must be a time 
of reorganization in the broadest sense, a time that must find its way to univer足
salism. The coming period must bring order to our minds, our production, our 
feeling, our economic and social development. It has to bridge the gap that, 
since the onset of mechanization, has split our modes of thinking from our modes 
of feeling. 
My first intention was to outline briefly the effects of mechanization, basing 
the study on specialize.d research in the particular fields with which we have to 
deal. I soon realized that this was impossible. Over vast stretches no research 
was available. I was unable to find any account of such revolutionary events as 
the development of the production line or the introduction of mechanical com足
fort and its tools in our intimate enviromnent. I had, therefore, to go back to the 
sources, as I could not hope to understand the effects of mechanization without 
knowing, in outline at least, its evolution. 
The process leading up to the present role of mechanization can nowhere be 
observed better than in the United States, where the new methods of production 
were first applied, and where mechanization is inextricably woven into the pattern 
of thought and customs. .~ 
But au amazing historical blindness has prevented the preservation of im足
portant historical docun1ents, of models, manufacturer's records, catalogues, 
advertising leaflets, and so on. Public opinion in general judges inventions and 
production exclusively from the point of view of their commercial success. To 
v 