tical farmer, a direct observer who did not bother with contemporary theory 
until, late and reluctantly, he set down his ideas in The New Horse Hoeing Hus­
bandry, 1731. This was the time when the theory of agriculture was drawing 
ever-greater attention. 
In France a new impulse was supplied hy the generation horn around 1700. 
These men were scholars like Reaumur, whose interest extended to agricultural 
problems, and like Henri Louis Duhamel Dumonceau, 1700-1782, who first 
built up a systematic physiology, or 'physics' as he called it, of plants. We 
must restrain ourselves from quoting Duhamel's Physique dRs arbres, 1758, or 
his much-read Elbnents d'agriculture, 1762, where, with that wonderful capacity 
for observation and directness of the eighteenth century, he reveals the laws 
governing the growth of plants: their root patterns suited to the type of soil, 
the transformation of their twigs into roots, the formation of hark, the circula­
tion of sap, the respiration of leaves. 
Duhamel, youngest son of a French nobleman, was an engineer and Inspector 
General of the Navy and author of a standard treatise on naval architecture. 
His passion was the study of agriculture. On his father's estate he investigated 
the nature of the soil, washing it, analyzing the remaining elements, and from 
1740 ou was apparently the first to keep a meteorological diary. He honors 
Jethro 'full and, althongh strongly opposing the substitution of tillage to ma­
nure10 and preferring to illustrate the French type of drill,n names his six-volume 
work, 1751-60: Traite d£ la culture des terres suivant les principes de Mr. Tull. 
Agriculture, ~ttan's Native Calling 
Attention increasingly turned to agriculture. To it all other occupations were 
subordinated. When the Physiocrats worked out a scientilic economic theory 
toward the end of the Roeoco period, between 1758 and 1770, they took the 
most extreme view regarding the sovereignty of agriculture over the quite 
secondary activities of flnanc£, commerce, and industry. Agriculture was the 
source of all wealth and the mainstay of economic life. It accounted for five­
12 
sixths of the national wealth. 'Agriculture is productive, industry is sterile.' 
Finance, commerce, and industry were thus seen as opposed to the ways of 
nature. 
The Physiocrats were no romantic idealizers of the peasant. They were 
spokesmen for la grand£ cultnre, and advocated 'in the culture of cereals large 
1o Ibid. pp.Sl-2. 
11 
Duhamel Dumonceau, Elements d'agricuUure, Paris, 1762, vol. n, p.37. 'Ces machines,' he says, 
referring to Tull's apparatus, •etoient trop compliquOOs et d'une trop forte depense.' 
12 
G. Weulersee, Les PhysWcrates, Paris, 1931, p.62. 
136 