Killing itself then cannot he mechanized. It is upon organization that the 
burden falls. In one of the great packing plants, au average of two animals are 
killed every second- a daily quota of some 60,000 head. The death cries of 
the animals whose jugular veins have been opened are confused with the rumbling 
of the great drum, the whirring of gears, and the shrilling sound of steam. Death 
cries and mechanical noises are almost impossible to disentangle. Neither can 
the eye quite take in what it sees. On one side of the sticker are the living; on 
the other side, the slaughtered. Each animal hangs head downwards at the 
same regular interval, except that, from the creatures to his right, blood is spurt­
ing out of the neck-wound in the tempo of the heart heat. In twenty seconds, 
on the average, a hog is supposed to have hied to death. It happens so quickly, 
and is so smooth a part of the production process, that emotion is barely stirred. 
What is truly startling in this mass transition from life to death is the com­
plete neutrality of the act. One does not experience, one does not feel; one 
merely observes. It may he that nerves that we do not control rebel somewhere 
in the subconscious. Days later, the inhaled odor of blood suddenly rises from 
the walls of one's stomach, although no trace of it can have clung to the person. 
How far the question is justified we do not know, nevertheless it may be asked: 
Has this neutrality toward death had any further effect upon us? This broader 
inlluence does not have to appear in the land that evolved mechanized killing, 
or even at the time the methods came about. This neutrality toward death 
may he lodged deep in the roots of our time. It did not hare itself on a large 
scale until the War, when whole populations, as defenseless as the animals 
hooked head downwards on the traveling chain, were obliterated with trained 
neutrality. 
MECHANIZATION AND GROWTH 
AROUND 1930 a new development begins and is now on the threshold of fuller 
realization. It points to a new epoch whose trend is away from the mechanical. 
It centers, as we have suggested, around man's intervention with organic sub­
stance. Animals and plants are to he changed in their structure and in their 
nature. The field of genetics, responsible for thi£. radical intervention, is au 
offshoot of biology, with which it carne into heiug. 
From the beginning man has interfered with nature hy domestication and 
breeding. He molded to his will the character of wild animals and wild plants. 
He domesticated them. He raised oxen and capons for his purposes. In Antiq­
uity, he coupled the mare and the ass, creating the sterile mule. The Arabs 
246 