107. Paris, Slaughterhouse of La Villette. 1863-7. These iron and glass halls, prototype of the abattoir, 
were buill by Haussman.n., prefect of Paris under the &cond Empire, on a scale unique in Europe. Each ox 
rested in a sial( before its slimghler in a separa.le booth. Runtinized mass sla.nghler is a.lien to lhi..~ calm, handi­
craft alrrwsphere. Europe's strong(y rooted feeling that each animal needs individual care explains this 
symhiosis of handicraft and centralization. 
What was going on in America at the time Haussmann built the slaughter­
house of La Villette? 
Chicago was engrossed in its first and wildest expansion. It bad the same prob­
lem to centralize the cattle lairages, to gather them in one place. This led to 
the founding of the Union Stock Yards, thenceforth the greatest cattle market 
in the world. Haussmann, having once opened La Villette, did not again set 
eyes on the plant during his administration. The decision to found the Union 
Stock Yards was made late in 1864. 'Work was commenced on June I, 1865, 
and by Christmas of that year the yards were thrown open for business. The 
yards were laid out as a rectangular figure, with streets and alleys crossing one 
another at right angles. About 120 acres were covered with pens when the 
Yards were opened. . . . Every railroad entering Chicago is connected with the 
7 
Stock Yards.' By 1886, when Andreas wrote his history of Chicago, the railroad 
trackage surrounding the stock yards had grown to a hundred miles. 
Here were no iron halls or stalls for the cattle; these animals brought in from 
the great plains had never known stalls. Summer or winter they could remain 
in the network of open pens of which the Stock Yards consisted. Thus the yards 
(fig. 108) formed a collection and market center, from which the cattle were 
driven directly up an open gangway into the top storey of the packing houses. 
Here was no architectonic plan. 
Built entirely of wood, and doubtless gradually, no one has ever thought of making a 
general plan of it. All has been constructed in haste and according to the needs of the 
1 
A. T. Andreas, History of Chicago, Chicago, 1886, voL 3, p.334. 
212 