were made in the first decades, but it was only toward mid-nineteenth century 
that interest began to awaken among the English public. Demonstration 
kitchens were put on view where a wide variety of gas-cooked dishes proved 
how well this tenuous fuel could serve the household. 
Well in the direction of the future standard was the gas range with a plain 
cast-iron top and spiral burners (fig. 361), constructed by a Glasgow restaurant 
owner and shown at the Great Exhihition of 1851. 
But even then the general public failed to patronize the range, which was 
mainly purchased for hotel kitchens. 'The 'history of the use of gas for heating 
and for cooking' during the three decades from 1850 to 1880 'was one of exceed­
ingly slow development.' 
In 1879 an English firm exhibited 'over three hundred appliances in which 
45 
gas was to he used for other purposes than lighting' - for ranges, ovens, 
fiat-irons, and other laundry appliances. This is supposed to have given con­
siderable impetus to the new fuel. 
Around 1880 the time slowly sets in during which the public loses its distrust 
of the gas range. But one must not suppose that people at large were quickly 
or easily won away from wood and coal to the imponderable fuel. In 1889 " a 
Chicago catalogue stresses: 'For eight years we have been manufacturing the 
Jewel (fig. 362). We were among the first to appreciate that gas was to be the 
fuel of the future. Is the use of gas for cooking purposes an extraordinary lux­
ury? No, it is an economical necessity. The popular prejudice is gradually 
47 
giving wa-y.' 
48 
AB late as 1910 'combined coal and gas cooking ranges' are listed. And 
even around 1915 the catalogues appeal in verse with the ever-returning refrain 
49 
'Save the Wife her Time and Care: Cook with Gas.' Nevertheless in 1910 
half the volume of gas used for illumination was already being consumed for 
burning purposes. 
Deviously, the pure forms of the gas range emerge around 1930- that is, at 
a time when gas cooking already had to reckon with a new rival, the electric 
range. There seemed to be no breaking loose from its prototype, the coal range; 
in the larger models the baking oven and broiler were still placed above the 
cooking top. In the smaller ones this led to somewhat girafiish proportions. 
4~ This, and the material above, from Morton, op.cit. 
46 
Prior to this time, from around 1380 on, America, with its abundant petroleum, had specialized in 
the gasoline stove, later perfected and still in use (kerosene stove) throughout the country. 
7 
~ George M. Clark & Co., 179 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, Jewel Gas Stove Catalogue; a copy in the 
FAison Institute, Dearborn, Michigan. 
«Catalogue of the Fuller and Warren Company, Troy, N.Y.; copy in the New York Public Library. 
49 
Catalogue of the Standard Lighting Company, Division of the American Stove Company, Cleve­
land, Ohio: 'New Process Gas Ranges'; copy in the New York Public Library. 
538 