the elements of his cure in a primitive setting, from which his period was totally 
estranged, which in itself was hound to make a stir. Equally uncustomary was 
the life of rustic rigor: rising at four in the morning; using damp towels and 
woolen blankets for several hours until sweat breaks out; then, a plunge in cold 
spring water, and a rub-down, followed hy au hour's walk and water drinking; 
at eight o'clock, breakfast, bread and cold milk; more movement; repeated cold 
massage until the body becomes red; at one o'clock, a simple lunch. A cos­
mopolitan society is here assembled, speaking French 'as if hy agreement.' 
After lunch, more exercise is prescribed, and finally a trip to the shower in the 
woods overlooking Graefeuberg; rest; for supper, bread and milk, as in the 
1nornmg. 
Priessnitz began in 1829 with 45 patients. In 1843 he had over 1500 guests 
and a fortune of £50,000. Cold-water-cure establishments using Priessnitz' 
methods spread to all countries around 1840, from Russia to America. So sug­
gestive was his example that the physician Barter named his institution the 
Irish Graefeuberg (fig. 464). 
In part, Priessnitz owed his success to almost magical powers of diagnosis and 
suggestion. The ground had heen prepared hy his medical forerunners in France, 
England, and Germany. Yet why did not the forces of established medecine, 
who cut open his sponges to see what drugs they concealed, crush him from the 
start? Behind him, as an invisible protector, stood the figure of Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau, a living force throughout the Romantic period. Priessnitz too seemed 
to his patients a part of nature, one in close touch with nature itself. With 
Priessnitz a new type of physician makes his appearance: the nature healer. 
Priessnitz' approach -hardening of the body and living in contact with 
nature -was soon taken over hy healthy people to offset the wear and tear 
of city life, thus passing from the reahn of therapy into that of regeneration. 
The Vapor Bath as a Private Cubicle c. 1830 
In medicine, the vapor hath was never quite forgotten. An early English 
48 
patent (1678) gives directions for building sweat baths useful in the cure of 
49 
gout and other ills. Nor were proposals lacking in the eighteenth centnry,
when medicinal !laths in London and Brighton often furnished the pretext for 
amorous gathering,;: · ·~ 
The early nineteenth century is ever bringing hack accounts of the bathing 
ts British Patent No. 200, 25 Mar. 1678. 
49 
British Patent No. 882, 11 Feb. 1767, 'The patient has an oil cloth covering let down on him.' British 
Patent, 20 Nov. 1798. 
662 