of the seat is calculated to the length of the thigh and the sweep of the knees; 
the arm rests retreat in deference to feminine dress. The comfort of sitting, 
representative of our culture, here finds its most refmed handling. 
In a third step, the last half of the nineteenth century takes a new path to 
comfort: It introduces movability. It accomplishes this by dissecting the furni­
tnre into a series of mobile planes regulated by a mechanism. This furniture 
is not con1parable in gracefulness to the Greek chairs, nor are its seats fashioned 
to the knees of conversing cavaliers. No precious material, no consummate 
form are found here. It is anonymous procluction stemming from anonymous 
inventors, serial production. This furniture is rooted in the habits and occupa­
tions of the nineteenth century. To the question whether the nineteenth cen­
tury had an attitude of its own, or whether it was destined to flit from disguise 
to disguise, its furniture holds the key. 
Posture in the Middle Ages 
How did people sit in the Middle Ages? 
Posture reflects the inner nature of a period. Medieval altars enthrone the 
madonnas in strong frontality before a golden background. On the Portals of 
Chartres, the figures stand in hierarchical array, as behind and above Biblical 
events are unfolded. At first glance, medieval posture would seem of ceremouial 
solemnity and these images projections of the ordered medieval society. 
But beyond the too easy sociological interpretation, another prospect opens. 
The feudal lords and ladies of the thirteenth century could sit and walk with 
great dignity of carriage, as revealed in the Gothic statues. The Middle Ages 
were capable of supreme solemnity. But this hearing formed part and parcel of 
the worship. W c have no faculty, perhaps, to feel the dignity and fervor that 
must have emanated from the medieval church service. No other furniture vied 
in splendor with the choir stalls for the ecclesiastics. The multitude knelt 
on the stone floor. Burgher life took quite another shape. Greece and the 
Middle Ages have this in common, for all their diversity: Monumentality is 
ahnost exclusively reserved for veneration of the divine. 
Rome's collapse re-echoed in every sphere of life. Cultural values that a 
millennium and a half had consolidated lost their meaning or were mutilated 
beyond recognition. When the nomads plundered Home, they found chairs 
that made no more sense to them than the statues, the thermae, the inlaid 
furniture, and all the instruments of a differentiated culture. Their habit was 
to squat on the ground, and so it remained. 
The culture now taking shape pursued ends as different from those of the 
262 