MECHANICAL COM.FORT IN THE HOUSEHOLD 
As we noted at the start of the chapter, the lightening of household bnrdens 
by the mechanization of work processes was most conspicuous among the clean­
ing tasks: laundering, ironing, disbwasbing, carpet sweeping, and furniture 
cleaning. Parallel with this ran the automatization of heating aod refrigeration. 
When did the methods that led to mechanization of the various processes 
first make their appearance? 
Here the answer is, as so often: in the 'fifties and 'sixties. To gain a perspec­
tive of the whole, we shall list the various categories in the order of time. We 
shall mention in order of their appearance the types that will be taken up again 
in the course of later development. 
The succession begins in 1858 with carpet cleaning." The aim is to dispense 
with back bending and with the to-and-fro motion of the broom-wielding hand. 
This end is achieved by means of rotating mechanisms used at the end of a 
handle. The principle of the domestic vacuum cleaner based purely on suction, 
which after many vicissitudes prevailed six decades later, was invented and 
60 
clearly formulated by 1859 (figs. 372-3). 
This patent of 1859, earliest in the long line of pure suction types, aims, as 
the inventor states, at avoiding the 'detrimental' effect of rotating brushes. 'The 
carpet sweepers heretofore contrived have operated by means of a cylindrical 
brush in contact with the surface of the carpet. . . . My present invention ... 
consists in the employment of a revolving fan (F) in lieu of the brush.' 
This fan consists of four metal blades carried on a spindle. It is highly geared 
to a wheel, which runs over the carpet so that 'by the motion of the fan the 
dust is blown into the pan and the carpet is cleaned even more perfectly than 
can be effected by a revolving brush.' The inventor is careful to stress that the 
fan 'is adjusted so as not to come in direct contact with the carpet.' 
The mechanical dishwashing machine came most surprisingly close to what 
six decades after was to prove its solution. Like Yale's lock, it was subsequently 
improved in detail while remaining unchanged in principle. The mechanical 
solution of the dishwashing process consists in driving water against the objects 
to be cleaned. This is done by metal blades rotating in the bottom of the tub 
and forcing the water upwards. In order to gain the benefit of its full force, 
the plates are stacked in a fixed wire frame at such an angle that the water 
impinges tangentially against them. It is a sort of turbine in reverse. This 
solution was offered by 1865 (fig. 375) "· The inventor may describe it more 
u In the year 1858 there were 5 patents awarded, and 9 in 1859. 
61 
Go U.S. Patent 22,488, 4 Jan. 1859, Carpet Fan Sweeper. U.S. Patent 51,000, 21 Nov. 1865. 
548 