under the Homestead Act was in no circmnstances to become liable for earlier 
debt. 
Supporting this measure were America's broad unopened spaces and demo足
cratic will. 'Instead of baronial possessions let us facilitate the increase of inde足
pendent homesteads. Let us keep the plough in the hand of the owner.' " 
The situation at that time favored the rise of the free farmer. The agricultural 
ladder, as this ascent from farmer lad to independent farmer was called, worked 
so well that the farmers complained of a lack of help. 'Good farm labor is very 
searce, from the fact as soon as a young man gets ahead in this country of cheap 
74 
land, they make arrangement to secure a farm of their own.' 
Grain was already being reaped hy machine at this time, and mechanization 
had reached an advanced stage. Textile mills demanded large accmnulations of 
capital. A reaper cost only $125. It was the pre-eminently democratic tool. 
As everywhere, mechanization intervening, the situation becomes involved. 
Lingering depressions darkened the agricultural picture. This was the price 
paid for access to the world market. As grain, meat, frnit were exported after 
the Civil War, the slumps set in, and with them a new unrest such as agriculture 
had not before known. It was no longer a matter of disenfranchised peasant 
masses, as in the time of the Reformation, but of free farmers, gathered in various 
political and organizational struggles against the dictatorship of the great corpo足
rations and the middle-men. It was a campaign against price fixing from without 
at sub-market levels. 
The reduction of work hours, rising productivity, and complicating of social 
conditions entered hand-in-hand with the change in social structure of the 
farmer. Mechanization had a decisive influence upon the expansion in size of 
the farm as observed from 1880 on. 
'Times are changing mister, don't you know? Can't make a living. Crop land 
isn't for little guys like us any more. . . . Nothing to do about it. You try to 
75 
get three dollars a day some place. That's the only way.' 
The commercialization of the farm is pointed out by Californian agricultural足
ists, 1926: 'We no longer raise wheat here, we manufacture it .... We are not 
husbandmen, we are not farmers. We are producing a product to sell ... .' " 
13 
Quoted in Carey McWilliams, Ill Fares the Land, Migrants and Migrating Labor in the United States, 
Boston, 1942, p.301. 
74 Quoted in Yearbook of Agriculture, 1941, p.l50. 
76
John Steinbeck, The Grapes of Wrath, Viking, New York, 1939. 
'1ll Carey McWilliams, op.cit. pp.30I-3. 
166 