'Heures de Turin,' which Huhert van Eyck painted for the hrother of the Uuke 
61 
of Burgundy in 1416. " . 
A slender dresser on high legs stands amid this lying-in room where John is 
born. Its receptacle is small and seems less important than the advancing top 
shelf and the plinth close to the floor, and the bulging pewter and copper vessels 
of the late Gothic household. As the miniatures show, such dressers were found, 
like the chest, in the study and other rooms. 
Far more common is the dresser backed to the wall and huilt around the chest 
of normal size. Chests had heen raised on feet since Romanesque time. Now 
62 
the hroad-faced planks become slender styles; and the heavy lid, smaller doors. 
The furniture is adorned in every way: hack and canopy are added, and a weh 
of enrichment and reliefs spreads over the whole piece. At the court of Burgundy, 
a superstructure of several shelves for the display of gold and crystal ware was 
usual. The number of these shelves increased with the rank of the owner. Only 
the Duke could claim to possess six shelves - for that 'one had to he a prince 
63 
sovereign.' 
Ornamental pieces usually owe their form to a utilitarian past. (Thus the 
console tables beneath the tall eighteenth-century mirrors derive from the 
volute-supported wall desks upon which monks wrote in the sixteenth.) The 
dresser, a piece on which food was set out and displayed before serving, pa%ed 
from the kitchen to the living room. It thus differs from the earlier types 
described, whose origin was monastic. 
In the thirteenth century the kitchen of the burgher house became detached 
64 
from the living room. Cooking and living thus tended to become separated. 
How far the separate kitchen in the burgher house was linked to the new found­
ing of cities lies open to enquiry. In the sixteenth century, too, the kitchen 
remained the room in which the burgher and, it is stated, the petty nobleman 
65 
took his meals. 
mIlL, Falke and Schmitz, op.cit. p.xxvii, text p.xuii. Havard (op.cit. vol. n, col. 199) reports in the 
Comptes des Dues de Bourgogne for 1399 a Dreclwir fcrmant a clef. The dresser may thus have been 
introduced toward the end of the fourteenth century. Even the sixteenth century does not accurately 
distinguish between the buffet, dresser, and cupboard. 
62 
Often one chest was laid upon another with doors opening frontwards; but this trend is more in the 
direction of the wardrobe, which long pre~erved its division into two parts. For even the seventeenth 
century did not break with the custom of laying clothes horizontally away, as in the chest. 
63 Havard, op.cit. vol. n, col. 199. 
M The great vaulted palace kitchens (Mont Saint Michel or the castle of Cintra in Portugal) are not 
considered here, for they were designed for large companies, which made detachment or separate housing 
unavoidable. 
65 Molinier, op.cit. p.25, 
298 