As soon as we draw near to the app~A!rance of the Greek tumhler locks in the 
fifth century, certainty again vanishes. Aristophanes' women, as has more than 
37 
once been pointed out, complain that the bad men have closed the larder door 
with the aid of a three-pronged Laconian 'secret key.' This merely indicates 
that the Lac,onian lock was a type of tumbler lock. Its three prongs and more 
especially its later name - 'Ballanos' or acorn lock "-liken it to keys belong­
ing to the Hellenistic period found hy Carter and others. This lock had cylin­
drical tumblers whose head, to prevent them from falling through, might he 
39 
somewhat broadened in acorn shape; whereas the wooden tumbler lock, which 
has spread almost the world over, had tumblers square of section, in no way 
suggestive of an acorn. It is hardly likely that the Greek tongue, with its precise 
and plastic figures of spe,ech, should use the word acorn to describe a square peg. 
40 
In fifth-century Greece this type was called the 'Laconian lock,' for it was 
from Laconia, the Greek mining center, where the metal industry flourished, 
that it spread to Athens and the rest of the Hellenic world." To Laconia, some 
venture to think, its route may have been from Egypt through Ionia and the 
42 
Greek Isles.
The Wooden-Key Type 
Of more direct interest to us here is the origin of the wooden-key type, which 
stacks its tumblers in aligned vertical grooves and raises them with a flat, 
wooden key. Ethnologists have felt that with certain locks in which the tumblers 
are aligned in one row a 'new moment' is reached," although they do not dis­
tinguish it in principle from the so-called 'Egyptian' lock. Nevertheless, this 
is a distinct type, pointing to a different origin. 
No real evidence is available concerning where and when it was developed. 
The time and country of its origin are a riddle. But certain symptoms are 
suggestive. 
sr Ibid. p.46. 
38 
Ibid. Ballanoi: acorns. The word ballanos was in general use in Aristophanes' time. Cf. Joseph 
Fink, Der Verschluss bei den Griechen und Roemern, Regenshurg, 1890, p.28. 
3~ Padlocks of Pompeiian time having tumblers of acorn shape have heen preserved. Illustrated in 
Daremberg and Salio, op.cit. p.124·7. 
4
° Fink, op.clt. pp.22-31, investigates in detail the Laconian lock. 
41 
Daremberg and Salio, op.cit. p.l244, article 'Sera,' with illustrations. 
42 
Even less conclusive concerning questions of origin are the specimens found today on the Greek 
Isles. Belonging mostly to the wooden-key type of tumbler locks, they are offshoots of a worldwide dis­
semination. cr. R. M. Dawkins, 'Notes from K.arpathos,' Annals of the Briiii;h School of Athens, IX, 
190ff. As Dawkins points out (p.l95), there is also folllld there a composite type, with two keys, one of 
which is used to ram the holt: 'a descendant of the Homeric lock.' 
43 
Luscllan, op.cit. p.409. Even if one cannot always concur with his conclusions, Luschan's exposition 
is of the soundest. 
73 