1556) was in no mood to take over the Islamic cult of bodily joy. The Escorial 
still re-echoes the gloom into which Spain increasingly sank. 
Soon, under the influence of the Reformation and the Counter-Reformation, 
medieval regeneration habits began to decay. The Middle ~es had by no 
means been hostile to the idea of regeneration. Swimming was a connnon sport. 
And tnb baths also were widely used. A well-known illumination of the Manesse 
manuscript (Heidelberg) shows a knight being attended in the hath by young 
women and showered with rose petal' like Telemacbus by the daughter of 
Nestor. There were also large-walled vats in which one might eat and listen 
to music, seen, for instance, in Albrecht DUrer's 'Men's Bath.' Medieval 
accounts hear witness to the important role of the bath in social life. Some­
times the stress falls on its erotic aspect (fig. 453), as in the late fifteenth-cen­
tury miniature, where the naked guests are gathered around a table in an enor­
mous wooden tub. 
The picture of medieval streets as pest-ridden alleys, without any form of 
sanitation, is being given up. It has long been known that medieval castles 
were far better off in the matter of drains and privies than Versailles, whose 
builders paid little heed to such facilities. Fourteenth-century London, more 
recent research has shown, possessed ground sewers, cesspools, and pnblic 
latrines." The cleanliness of their streets was a point of especial pride with 
the Florentines of the fifteenth century." 
Hygienic precautions were habitual and included free hospitalization as well 
as measures for the checking of contagious diseases, concerning which the 
Middle Ages were better informed than Antiquity." Among these institutions 
were numerous pnblic baths under the supervision of barber-surgeons. 
The Saturday bath of apprentices was provided for hy a regular allowance. 
These baths, of which no example remains, were as frugally furnished as Gothic 
living quarters. Albrecht DUrer, in 'The Woman's Bath,' shows what a pnblic 
bathhouse looked like. Exceedingly primitive, it is true, but the whole room 
with its fireplace, bot-water vessels, and various levels, immediately suggests 
how far these installations were everyday things. 
A eonnnon trend links the medieval bath with the ancient and the Islamic: 
It was a place of social intercourse. In the bath, the men talked polities as in 
the taverns. The baths are also said to have been places where conspiracies 
were knotted during the Reformation. Instead of the Islamic massage expert 
m~ Ernest L. Sabine, 'Latrines and Cesspools in Medieval London,' Speculum, vol. IX (Cambridge, 
Mass, 1934), pp.306-9. 
33 
Lynn Thorndike, 'Baths and Street Cleaning in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance,' Speculum, 
vol. m (1926), p.201. 
M Ibid. 
652 