165 
York, 1944), or else a locker plant may be operated by the connnuuity and 
made available to all on a co-operative basis - as bas already been done in 
recently developed places. At an early date, in 1936, tbe farmers of the Ten­
nessee Valley Authority region set up a co-operative freezing plant. Perhaps 
it will prove the means for an awakening of community interest. The locker 
plant may be part of the small civic center tbat must be planned tcday for every 
community of a few thousand people. Wbetber this is the course tc be followed 
or whether the locker plants will become part of a gigantic concern extending 
from tbe Atlantic tc the Pacific depends finally upon tbe will of the citizens. 
What will be tbe influence of quick freezing upon city dwellers? Here, teo, 
various outcomes are possible. We shall do no more than touch upon the two 
extremes. 
In an American kitchen, fully pictured in Life Magazine (fig. 440), stands a 
heavy table, a cutting block as in tbe butcher's stcre. A butcher's block amid 
full mechanization? Tbe architect, Fordyce, has indicated a white enameled 
receptacle, the quick-freezing chest, intended tc preserve large sections of meat 
bought wbole and requiring a block in order tc be cut correctly. 
Tbe time of full mechanization brings back the possible laying-in of a stcre 
of meat or other foodstuffs, even by city dwellers. In 1945 fashionable New York 
apartment houses were to install basement locker plants with at least one locker 
for each tenant. 
Provisions set aside almost on the medieval pattern; contact with natural 
materials, not cans; craftsmen-like pleasure in spontaneous culinary preparation. 
These things are possible too. 
At the other extreme: 
Meats will be cooked in ton-size batches under the direction of world-famous chefs and 
packaged in containers. Then, one minute before dinner time, the housewife will place 
the pre-cooked frozen meal into a special electronic oven. This oven will employ high 
frequency radio waves which penetrate all foods equally ... in a few seconds a bell will 
ring and the whole dinner will pop up like a piece of toast. 
165 'A frozen-food locker plant,' as officially defined, is 'a term applied Loa modern low temperature 
food storage. The services of such a plant include processing, preparation, and freezing. The principal 
components of a frozen-food locker plant are: 
L A chilling and aging room at 36-SO F., where fresh killed meat i~ chilled and aged and other products 
are chilled, prior to processing and preparation for freezing. 
2. A processing room where meats are cut to order. Meats, fruits, and vegetables are packaged prior 
to freezing. 
3. A quick-freezing cabinet is used to produce a completely frozen product. 
4. A locker room containing several hundred separate lockers for rental to individuals. Temperature 
oo F.' 
Report of the Task Committee, War Production Board, July 1941, reprinted in Tauheneck, op.cit. p.375. 
605 