The fact was that they possessed an inner orientation, an outlook on life 
different from ours. Just as we were unable to invent a form of relaxation suited 
to our way of life, the ancients gave little thought to lending their inventive 
powers to practical ends. 
Inexhaustible are the proposals for birds that move their wings and chirp 
when water pressure drives air through hidden pipes; for water organs built on 
the same principle; for series of magic vessels with intermittent flow; for autom­
atons that alternately pour water and wine or deliver a quota of consecrated 
water when a coin is inserted. 
This love of the miraculous was passed on to the Arahs. Conspicuous in Islamic 
miniatures are the automatons, all based on Alexandrian principles. 
The urge to put invention in the service of the miracle survived throughout 
Islam down to the eighteenth century. What created a sensation in the late 
eighteenth century was not the new spinuing machinery, hut the manlike autom­
atons who walked, played instruments, spoke with human voices, wrote, or 
drew. They were shown before the courts of Europe, and finally toured from 
fair to fair, well into the nineteenth century. The perfecting of automatons in 
the eighteenth century is related to the high standard of the crafts and especially 
to the refinement of the clock-making industry. They are based on a minute 
decomposition and reintegration of movements, which formed the hest of dis­
ciplines for the invention of spinning machinery. 
The Miraculous and the Utilitarian 
To go one step further: observing the constituent elements of these tools that 
were decisive for the first period of mechanization, textile machinery, and steam 
engines, we find them to be the last term of a development extending from Alex­
andrian times onward. What has changed is the orientation, from the miraculous 
to the utilitarian. The steam engine, as left by James Watt, combines utiliza­
tion of the vacuum (condenser) with transmission of movement; and the 
machines of the textile industry show the same cunning mind for decomposing 
and recombining movements that created the man-like automatons. 
To illustrate in a simple way how the miraculous and the utilitarian co-existed 
in the eighteenth century, we shall recall one ofthe great inventors ofthe Rococo: 
Jacques de Vaucanson, 1709-82. He is a mechanical genius whose lifetime runs 
parallel with Louis XV and Bulfon. In him the two opposite conceptions dwell 
side by side. His automatons hear witness to an astonishing capacity for turning 
machines into performers of complex organic movements. Vaucanson had studied 
anatomy, music, and mechanics, all of which he intimately fused in his most 
famous automatons, the flutist, the drununer, and the mechanical duck. 
34 