The Bathroom Becomes Mechanized 
Around 1900 it became clear that the hath cell with hot and cold running water 
was the type upon which our period had set its mind. Bathroom and bedroom 
eventually formed a unit, just as the apartments of the Baroque palaces were 
fused in inseparable unity of plan with their dependencies, wardrobes, toilets, 
or pantries. 
But even in 1900, after the long period of indecision, the bathroom was still 
an amenity of the privileged classes. The essential elements of its popular 
diffusion were lacking. No bathtub comparable in serviceability and appearance 
to the luxury porcelain tuh had yet reached standard form. Nor was the hot­
water system satisfactory. Well thought-out accessories were likewise lacking. 
It is not difficult to trace the clear-cut trends of such complex mechanisms as 
the automobile or the locomotive. But in tracing the development of the present­
day bath, one wanders through a maze of quaint stories and anecdotes. The 
reason for this is invariably the same: Inspiration failed when it was needed for 
hmnan requirements. 'fhe outcome was a technical lameness depressing to sur­
vey and unrewarding to dwell upon. We shall turn our attention to the last 
decades, when the period was beginning to see more clearly what it wished. 
hath cell rapidly attained 
Then the indispensable inventions were made. The 
its standard form, especially in the country that was the most eager for a democ­
ratized comfort. This was in the time of full mechanization. Straightway the 
two foci of mechanization, the bathroom and the kitchen, come to dominate, 
perhaps even to tyrannize, the plan of the house. Reasons of economy-- the 
cutting down of installation costs through closest possible concentration of 
kitchen, hath and water closets -often curtail the architect's freedom more 
than he might wish. 
From the Nomadic to the Stable 
A few words concerning the type's morphological evolution. 
Furniture in the Middle Ages passed from a nomadic to a stable condition. 
And in the nineteenth century this happened to the hath. The portable hath 
turned into a fixed bath anchored within a complex network of piping and ven­
tilation. In medieval times, nomadicism was the result of the instability of 
living conditions; in our own period, of the instability of our orientation. 
__,.._ 
475. Bathroom with Heater, for a Barber Shop. Chicago, 1888. 'It is usual in our large cities W provide 
bathing facilities in all hotels as well as in the larger barber shops,' writes W. P. Gerhard (1895). This equip­
ment made by a barber--chair mn.nufaclurer could be set up UJitJwut a plumber's aid. The medieval combinaiion 
of bathing and hair culling reappears here, but with a very different emphasis: the bathroom has become a mere 
accessory to the barber shop. (Catalogue Th. Koehs, Chicago, 1888) 
682 