Aristotle on an important issue. Thomas Aquinas' questiouing how the world 
was created from nothingness, and what principles and first causes underlay 
God's action, led to a searching into the question of change and, closely related 
to this, into the nature of movement. 
As the Greek temple symbolizes forces in equilihrinm, in which neither verticals 
nor horizontals dominate, the earth in the classical view formed the forever 
immovahle center of the cnsmos. 
The soaring verticals of the Gothic cathedrals mark no equilibrium of forces. 
They seem the symbols of everlasting change, of movement. The stillness and 
contemplation emanating from these churches escapes no one; hut, at the same 
time, the whole architecture, both within and without, is caught up in an unceas足
ing stream of movement. 
Parallel in time, the Scholastics become ever more concerned with explaining 
the nature of movement. The hypothesis of the earth's daily rotation was 
increasingly discussed, as Pierre Duhem has pointed out, by the circle of Pari足
sian philosophers from the fourteenth century on. Nicolas Oresme, Bishop of 
Lisieux (1320?-82), gave ample support to this hypothesis,' and- says Duhem, 
the great French physicist, mathematician, and historian -with greater preci足
sion than Copernicus later. Oresme propounds the theory in a penetrating 
commentary to the first translation into the French, made at Charles V's behest, 
of Aristotle's Treatise on the Heavens (Du Ciel ei du Monde). He entitles the 
relevant chapter: 'Several fine arguments ... to show that the earth moves in 
2 
daily movement and the sky not.' Here he proposes that the movement of the 
heavens can equally well be explained hy the circling of the earth around the 
sun; that the earth revolves, not the sky around the earth. To Pierre Dnhem's 
question whether Oresme inspired Copernicus, it has been objected that Coperni足
cus started from the logical and geometrical contradictions of the Ptolemaic 
system." This in no way lessens Oresme's achievement. 
Nicolas Oresme rises from the hrilliant circle of Parisian Scholastics, its last 
great representative after Jean Buridan (1300-c.1358) and Albert of Saxony 
(1316-90). Ever present in their discussions and cogitations is the giant figure 
of Aristotle. There was no other guide. On him they test their thought; on 
1 
Pierre Dubem, 1861-1916, has brought this aspect of Nicolas Oresrnc to light in 'Un precurseur 
fraw;ais de Copernic, Nicole Oresme (1377),' Revue yCnkrale des sciences pares el appliqukes, Paris, 1909, 
vol. 20, pp.866--73. 
2 Le livre du Ciel el drl Monde, Orf\"ruc's Freneh translation of Aristotle, has reeently bt>Rn printed in 
Medieval Studies, vols. m-v, New York, 1941, with a commentar-y b-y Albert. D. Menut and A. J. Denomy. 
s Duhem's third volume of his Etudes sur Leonard de Vinci, Les prkcurseurs parisiens de Galilee, 
Paris, 1913, demonstrates in monumental fashion that the principles of Galilean mechanics were already 
formulated in this circle. 
15 