348. RUMFORD: Oval Range for Mt1itary Hospital at Munich, Late 18th 
Century. The formation of the modern kitchen stove is connected with the gr(}Wth 
of soup kitchens and other mass1eeding facilities. Rumford lwlWw.~ his ra.nges in 
semi-circular or oval form, like rococo maisons de plaisance. The cook doe-a rwt 
have to move around the range, but can watch his pols while slanding in the center. 
(Counl Rumford, Complete Works, Boston, 187{}-75, l)()[.m) 
spread in Pennsylvania (he also calls it 'Holland Stove'). It was made of cast­
iron plates. Using the same material, he formed an air hox with cast-iron walls 
in which 'the smoke ascends and descends and heats the plates' (fig. 347). By 
this and other improvements he more fully used the escaping heat, and allowed 
it to radiate more equally through the room."' 
Benjamin Thompson, Count von Rumford (1753-1814), raised in colonial 
America, was a British officer, Bavarian statesman and general in chief, and, 
which is to the point here, one of the great late eighteenth-century physicists. 
34 
We have already mentioned Rumford's indirectly heated oven, designed for 
the kitchen of a workhouse that he founded in Munich, where the heat and 
smoke passed through a ramification of flues around the sunk-in saucepans. 
Investigator of latent heat, inventor of the soups that still hear his name, 
author of an essay 'Of the Excellent Qualities of Coffee and the Art of Making 
It in the Highest Perfection'" (giving recipes and several designs of percolators 
aa It is rewarding to read Franklin's own deoc:ription and the six methods he lists for artificial heating 
in his time; and interesting to note that he mentions to the disadvantage of the Dutch Stove that 'There 
is no sight of the fire which is in itself a pleasant thing.' And of the 'German Stove,' where the h€'.at is 
piped in from another room, he remarks 'People have not even so much sight of the fire as in the Holland 
Stove.' Cf. Jared Sparks, The Works of Benjamin Franklin, London, 1882, vol. 6, pp.38, 43, 44. 
M Referred to in 'The Mechanization of Baking,' above. 
35 
Sir Benjamin Thompson, (Count) Rumford, Complete Works, 4 vols., Boston, 1870-75, vol. 4. 
530 