Mechanism and form- thinking and feeling- are emhodied as an indivisible 
unity in the English furniture, the most intense phase of which falls within barely 
two decades. The nineteenth centnry seemed predestined to grow into the most 
brilliant epoch of urbanism and, hacked hy all the knowledge of the eighteenth 
to develop its intimate setting to hitherto unknown perfection. 
centnry, 
In addition, the power of mechanization was at hand, which, as Henri de 
Saint-Simon could believe, wonld forever do away with human drudgery. 
But history, like nature, follows no simple logic. It seems senseless to us 
that, for unknown cosmic reasons, frnit blossoms must be killed by frost or 
wheat destroyed hy hail. We cannot understand why suddenly and without 
apparent cause, developments full of promise are cut short and their constituent 
elements forgotten until a similar psychical constellation is ready to gather them 
up agam. 
The unity of form and mechanism becomes split in the nineteenth centnry. 
The circle around William Morris strives for morally pure forms; and the anony­
mous American patent-furniture movement pursues motion problems. Both 
move side hy side in the latter half of the nineteenth century, and the roots of 
both go hack to England of the late eighteenth. 
It is on the tragic side of the nineteenth centnry that thinking and feeling go 
separate ways, or, as T. S. Eliot expresses it, 'the substantial unity of soul' is 
destroyed. 
It was not merely an ontside influence, the Empire style, that sterilized the 
English movement. The late work of Sheraton, and especially the posthmnous 
publication from studies for an encyclopedia, which never got beyond the first 
few letters, already show the flame extinguished. 
A hmnan change was occurring, on the one side of the channel as on the other; 
but it crystallized more palpably in the figure of Napoleon and of the formers of 
the Empire style. 
They introduce what we call the ruling taste: the transitory phenomena that 
absorb the feeling of the masses as, in artificial fertilization, dununies intercept 
the seed of the bnll. 
328 