We entered an immense low-ceiled room and followed a vista of dead swine upon their 
backs, their paws stretching mutely towards heaven. Walking down to the vanishing 
point we found there a sort of human chopping machine where the hogs were converted 
into commercial pork. A plank table, two men to lift and turn, two to wield the cleavers, 
were its component parts. No iron cog-wheels could work with more regular motion. Plump 
falls the hog upon the table, chop, chop; chop, chop; chop, chop, fall the cleavers. All is 
over. But before you can say so, plump, chop, chop; ehop, chop; chop, chop, sound again. 
There is no pause for admiration. By a skilled sleight-of-hand, hams, shoulders, clear, 
mess, and prime fly off, each squarely cut to its own place, where attendants, aided hy 
trucks and dmnh-waiters, dispatch each to its separate destiny - the ham for Mexico, 
its loin for Bordeaux. Amazed beyond all expectation at the celerity, we took out our 
watches and counted thirty-five seconds, from the moment when one hog touched the 
tshle until the next occupied its place. The numbers of hlows required I regret we did 
19 
not count.
Mechanization Extended: Chicago (186!1-85) 
Cincinnati, long after it had been overshadowed hy Chicago, remained the 
place with the widest experience in the packing industry. Here new appliances 
were tried out and their efficiency put to the test. 
Despite the mass of materiul processed, Cincinnati still relied mainly on 
the landscape architect Frederick Law Olmsted left CU.­
local supplies. When 
cinnati for Texas hy road, the coach horses were obliged to wade slowly through 
'droves of hogs grunting their obstinate way towards Cincinnati and a market. 
. . . Though the conntry was well wooded,' he asserts, 'I venture to say we 
20 
met as many bogs as trees. . . .' 
The local provisioning sufficient to Cincinnati's packinghouses· contrasts 
strongly with what occurred later at Chicago. The enormons quantities that 
this center bad to process required a gigantic area of snpply. In Chicago we 
are dealing with dimensions for which there is, even today, no yardstick. A 
spontaneously growing center of force, it embodies, as few other places do, that 
brutal and inventive vitality of the ninetesntb century. Increasingly it became 
the most important link between the raisers and the consumers of a vast country. 
At the beginning of the 'seventies- just before the world crisis of 1873-
21 
an observer speaks of tlie incalcnlable potentialities of this city. This readi­
ness for achievement unlimited in scope gave the necessary impnlse for large­
scale experimentation. As soon as the industry began to process animals by 
the million, the necessary instrmnents lay at hand. Mass production of raw 
material (grain, cattle) parallel with mechanization of processing (machinery, 
U0lmsted, A Journey through Texas, New York, 1857, p.9. 
w Olmsted, op.cit. p.l2. 
21 
James Parton, Triumphs of Enterpriu., Ingenuity and Public Spirit, New York, 1872, ch. IL 
218 