WaJJ there no comfort at all? Rooms meagerly equipped with a series of chests, 
of rough-hewn trestle tables and clumsily joined bedsteads- could this be 
called comfort? 
From the early Middle Ages until well into the thirteenth century, the monks 
were the agents and creators of cultural life. The nobles hunted and warred 
in the age of chivalry, From their warring and their loving, the great medieval 
epics arose. But in no broader sense were they the shapers of cultural life. In 
the Middle Ages, one has ever to fall back upon anonymous monasticism, which 
carried the whole burden of culture. Monasteries of various orders had become 
highly mmplex organisms during the early Middle Ages. Monasteries were the 
highest agents of civilization, the foci of social activity, of contact with other 
lands, the source of all education and learning, which preserved the ancient 
authors and wrote in Latin the chronicles of their own time. Their vast build­
ings afforded at once hostels for wayfarers, almshouses for the poor, hospitals 
for the sick. Over their abbey lands, which proved so attractive to the nobles 
of the Reformation, they ruled as powerful landowners and large-scale agrariall8. 
In an age of lasting strife the monasteries alone offered a place of relative safety 
and stability. 
In this milieu, medieval furniture took shape. Within monastic walls were 
developed the faldstools of bronze or wood and other ecclesiastical thrones of 
antique inheritance, the choir stalls, the lectern of chapel and sacristy, the 
writing desks of the cells, and the long, narrow trestle tables of the refectories. 
Piece after piece was later taken over by the secular household. 
Even the washstands built into niches or corner cupboards reflect a monastic 
pattern in their narrow metal reservoir above a cock and hand basin. First 
having a conical reservoir, as in DUrer's 'l,ife of the Virgin,' and later built into 
the wash cupboard of tall Gothic proportions, they were finally fused into the 
dresser. 
The monastic lavatoria of the thirteenth century (as for instance at St. Denis) 
were vaulted rooms near the refectory. Water usually flowed in thin streams 
from a central font, 'usually circular in shape and pierced with several open­
66 
ings.' Here the monks carried out their prescribed light ablutions. 
Of course there were always jugs for pouring water over the master's hands 
after meals. Some wooden or iron washstands of southern France had hasill8 
67 
mounted on a metal or wooden pedestal. But the lavatorimn with reservoir 
tap and basin is quite different from these. It seems rather a section of the monu­
mental lavatoria of the monks simplified and scaled to burgher life. 
66 Havard, op.c:it. vol. u, col. 281. 
67 Ibid. vol. u, col. 797. 
300 