Visualization of Movement in Space, c.l880 
Finall~ Marcy comes to the domain that is of particular concern to ns: render­
ing the true form of a movement as it is described in space. Such movement, 
J\!larey stresses again and again, 'escapes the eye.' 
He first attempted a graphic portrayal of movement in the late 'sixties. A 
dove harnessed to a registering device (fig. 5) transmits the curve of its wing 
heats to smoked cylinders. From these the fom1 of the movement is plottod 
out point by point. 
At the beginning of the 'eighties, J\!larey began to use photography for the 
representation of movement. The idea occurred to him in 1373, when an astron­
omer showed the Academic des Sciences four successive phases of the sun on a 
single plate. Another hint he found in the 'astronomical revolver' of his col­
league Janssen, who- approximately at the same time·- caught on its revolv­
ing cylinder the passage of the planet Venus across the sun. J\!larey now tried 
using this procedure for terrestrial objects. He devised his 'photographic gun' 
(fig. 6) to follow llying sea gulls. Instead of stars in motion he portrayed birds 
12 
in llight.
The astonishing photographic studies of motion that J\!luybridge was perform­
ing in California also stimulated Marcy to v;ork along these lines, although 
their methods, as we shall see, differed considerably. Muybridge arranged a 
series of cameras side by side so that each camera caught an isolated phase of 
the movement. Marcy, as a physiologist, wanted to capture movement on a 
single plate and from a single point of view, to obtain the undisguised record 
of continuous motion as he had graphically registered it on his smoked drums. 
12 Marey also devised the first mo·vie camera with film reels (1886), and showed Edison his flrst short 
'movie' during the Paris Exhibition of 1889. Like most of the great ninett~erJth-century scientists, Marey 
was not interested in the market value of his ideas. The practical solutions came from Edison in the 
beginning of the 'nineties and from LumiCre in 1895. 
6. E. J. ::\1A.REY: Recording Move~ 
mcnt by Photography. Photo-gun to 
Register PhaSf'-S of a Bird's Flight, 1885. 
The barrel houses a camera lens. The 
plates are carried on a revolving cylinder 
and changed by action of the trigger. 
Sixteen exposures a minute. (La 
methode graphique, Paris, 1885) 
21 