T1te Automatic Assembly Line, c.l920 
Toward the end of the eighteenth century, Oliver Evans at one stroke achieved 
continuous line production, an automatic unit in which man acted only as an 
observer. 
More than a century and a half later the curve gradually closes. Again we 
are approaching the point where a continuous production line, with man serving 
only as an observer, is the objective. Now it is not for the automatic grinding 
of grain, but for the building of complicated machinery, involving hundreds of 
different operations. 
It is increasingly clear that the assembly line, as developed from the packing 
houses, through the automobile industry, and beyond, forms an intermediate 
stage: Man has still to perform whatever movements the engineer cannot yet 
delegate to the machine. Quite possibly this form of mechanical work will in 
some future day he pointed to as a symptom of our barbarism. 
The impulse toward a new phase, the automatic assembly line, again has its 
starting point in the automobile industry. The reason is plain: for the first time 
an industry was faced with the problem of building a most complex mechanism 
by the million. A new scale was thus introduced. 
Mter Ford's assembly line was in operation, L. R. Smith, Milwaukee manu­
facturer, raised the question (1916): 'Can automobile frames be built without 
men?' 
'Its answers rested in the subconscious mind of engineers. We set out,' he 
11 
says, 'to build automobile frames, without men. We wanted to do this on a 
scale far beyond that necessary to meet the immediate requirements of the auto­
mobile industry.' 
Now the question that could not be permanently evaded is raised, from within 
the industry, not from outside influences: 'It is highly probable that watching 
our workers do the same thing over and over again, day in and day out, sent 
72 
us on our quest for the 100% mechanization of frame manufacture.' 
It was this often clairvoyant optimism which, at a time when the industry as a 
whole was producing no more than a million and a half automobiles a year, 
conceived, and within five years built, a single plant to produce more than a 
million yearly. 'A completed frame leaves the conveyor end, brushed and 
cleaned for the paint line, every ten seconds of the production shift. It takes 
ninety minutes from the strip of steel as received from the mill to the delivery 
73 
of an enameled automobile frame into storage.' 
71 
L. R. Smith, 'We Build a Plant to Run without Men,' The Magazine of Business, New York, 
February 1929. 
'1t Ibid. Ja Ibid. 
118 