other end is hooked into sockets ... so as to be readily detachable." The dwell足
ing house was still at the back of Pullman's mind. He sank the provision room 
like a cellar beneath the floor of the car; there were china closets between the 
windows and a large water tank above the kitchen. 
Napoleon III had his wagon d'honneur in which to hold receptions. Divans 
lined its walls as in fashionable drawing rooms of the Second Empire. For the 
ruler there was reserved a seat of honor, sofa-like, and set apart (fig. 293). 
Viollet-le-Duc, who designed the train for the Paris and Orleans Hailway Com足
pany, imparted to this seat something of his delicate romanticism. These wagons 
d'honneur became drawing-room cars for everyone in America, ten years later 
(1867), when Vanderbilt's protege Wagner gave them to the public. George 
M. Pulhnan's first drawing-room car dates from 1875. In it were no divans 
along the wall, no stiff and upright seat of honor; instead, there were a number 
of equally comfortable swivel chairs with adjustable backs in which one could 
pivot with ease. Comfort was rapidly growing. Soon the movable footrests 
already projected in the 'fifties came into use, together with the various amenities 
of the patent-furniture movement, then reaching its fullest extent. The simple, 
concise lines of the adjustable swivel armchairs of 1875 were the logical result 
of obedience to function. No William Morris was needed to purify their design. 
As we have mentioned, from 1893 " onward the appointments and the ceiling 
became increasingly exuberant, and one realizes what detours had to be threaded 
before there could be any return to forms better suited to purpose. The parlor足
car chairs of 1875 were as far from the exuberant ornamentation of the 'nineties 
as from our own 'streamline' designs. 
Retrospect 
American society of the railroad-building era was democratic in tone at a 
time when reaction governed European society. In Europe, that is to say, the 
upper classes walked amid every deference, while the common people had to 
put up with anything. This democratic outlook of the early years of American 
railroad building has been passed down to the modern European traveler in the 
continual perfecting of his comfort. Item by item, as they appeared, the improve足
ments in travel comfort were taken over from America: in 1873, the sleeping 
car; in 1879, the 'dining-room carriage,' as the English called it; in 1889, the 
vestibule train. 
86 
Charles S. Sweet, in his 'Sketch of the Evolution of the Pullman Car' (op.cit.), distinguishes two 
nineteenth-century styles: 'the plain type ceiling of 1865-1892' and 'the semi- and full-empire ceiling 
about 1893'- the heavily ornamented and vaulted ceiling. 
467 