haul goat, naturalism and eeriness, which pervades the nineteenth century can 
arouse a certain nostalgia. The interiors of this age, with their gloomy light, their 
heavy curtains and carpets, their dark wood, and their horror of the void, breathe 
a peculiar warmth and disqniet. All in all, they reflect the profound pessimism 
that bangs over the whole reahn of feeling in this period. That is one faee of the 
century, a direction opposite to that of practical life, to the aggressiveness and 
optimism of industry. 
The realm of feeling remained under the spell of that somber, chaotically 
splintered, often mendacious side. Taste was robbed of its emotional security, 
and gyrated in circles from period to period. Thus, in the 'thirties, the 'sixties, 
and the 'nineties, the Hococo manner was adopted again and again in various 
ways. 
There is no difference between the pseudo-monmnentality of the bnildings 
and that of the furniture. Both belong to the transitory phenomena, unqnickened 
by the blood of true inventiveness. Yet they dominate the feeling of their day 
and mercilessly stifle every impulse that springs from the deeper sources of the 
period. 
The unexplored complex of patent furniture stands apart from the ruling 
taste. It called forth nearly all the constituent powers of the century. It revealed 
the century as it liked to relax when wearing none of its masks. This patent 
furniture tackled problems in a manner completely new to the century. 
How did it come about? 
' A unifying trend runs through the abundance of still unreckoned solutions. 
Furniture was dissected into separate elements, into separate planes. These 
movable elements, which a governing mechanism linked and regulated, enabled 
the furniture to change in adaptation to the body and various postures. The 
furniture was thus endowed with a flexibility unknown before, and ceased to be 
a rigid, static implement. Not by accident did the problem of mechanically 
operated artificial limbs draw so strong an interest at this time (fig. 232). Patent 
furniture could perform alternate functions. What interests us more, it could 
take on any desired position of the hmnan body, change from this position, and 
return to the normal. Corofort actively wrested by adaptation to the body, 
as against corofort passively derived from sinking hack into cushions- here 
is the whole difference between the constituent furniture and the transitory 
furniture of the last century. 
The basic problem of patent furniture was above all a problem of motion. 
The Americans of about 1850 to 1893 drew upon an almost inexhaustible fantasy 
to solve the motion problem for furniture. Often they were completely disin-
390 