center. Others again, seeking to imitate the movements of the human hand, 
made the agitator swing like a cradle. One innovator, Rollet, whose A1errwire 
sur la Meunerie, 1847, is a source of meticulous infonnation on the mechanical 
up to mid-century, built a kneader which both struck and pushed. 
development 
It was a time of experimentation in the most diverse directions, to the end of 
performing the complex work of the human hand by mechanical means. Invented 
9 
shortly before mid-century (1347) was a mixer embodying the principle that 
subsequent decades were to adopt. 
91. Kneading Maehine, 1810 . .f. B. Lembeet. A kneading machim• on ihe dwm pciacipie, with a iacge 
wooden cylinder rolating on a fwrizon.lal axis, was invented by the French baker Lembert toward the end of 
the cighleenlh cenlury. The device proved suecessful, and many meehan£cal kneaders foltowed. Before 1850 
the principle of the nwdern kneader was detlcloped in France. However, the ordinary needs of the .l:!,'uropean 
baker were Mllarge enough for the advantageous use of machines, (C. H. Schmidt, Das deutsche BUeker­
handwerk in Jahre 1847, Weimar 1847) 
The inventions, despite their astonishing number, were extremely slow to be 
adopted. The reason given for this is that 'the ordinary needs of the baker 
were not large enough for the advantageous aud profitable use of machines; for 
even with machines, many stages of dough-making must he performed by 
10 
baud.' This observation, referring to conditions in Germany in the 'forties, 
does not essentially differ from a report, in the Scientific American for 1835, on 
a French mixer then to be seen in operation at a fashionable bakery on the 
Avenue de !'Opera in Paris: 'kneading by hand usually employed in all bakeries, 
11 
is here replaced hy machinery.' Indeed, the first rotary mixer was not 
9 
French Patent 2754,. Description des brevets d'inveniion, vol. 10, p.2l6, Boland, 15 Jan. 1847. 
1o Christian H. Schmidt, op.cit. p.230. 
n &ientifie American, 17 Oct. 1885 
171 