leap to the higher levels, its distribution to the kitchen and ultimately to the 
bath, 
The same applies to the hot water supply, The nineteenth century -like 
Homeric times-- drew its hot water from the kitchen in buckets. From the 
'forties on, America began to use copper or iron boilers connected with the 
range. Various plans were put forward. The tall, upright, uninsulated boiler, 
adjacent to the range but distinct from it., became standard. Yet tbe develop­
ment did not. move forward directly. 
Running hot water is another prerequisite of the mechanized bathroom. We 
may roughly trace the following phases: tub and heater forming a portable set; 
tnb and beater permanently affixed to the bathroom plumbing; hot water 
82 
supplied from a single point in the house or, in our century, supplied to the 
83 
apartment bouse from a central plant. Huuning water was brought to the 
various fixtures in this general order: the kitchen sink, the washbasin, and, lastly, 
the bathtub. Piping water to the washbasin was an important labor-saving 
device. This may explain why America was foremost with this innovation. 
An English witness of the 'nineties reports: 'In America these fixtures are used 
in every mansion and in every dressing room. Domestic labor-saving appliances 
are more thoroughly appreciated on the other side of the Atlantic than with 
84 
us. Patented appliances arc more nun1erous in Ainerica for the same reason.~ 
Washbasins lilted with faucets are to be found, it is true, in the catalogues of 
the 'fifties, hut they drew their water by hand pump, like the sink in Catherine 
Beecher's kitchen of 1869. Here too, the sleeping car produced a technically 
adequate solution at an early date. In the 'seventies, as we shall see, a sensation 
was created when a Boston hotel provided running water in every room. Around 
1890 the now forgotten face showers, which rose like a fountain from the bottom 
of the basin, were used for ablutionary purposes." 
With full mechanization, in the early 'twenties, ahnost lavish consumption 
of hot water became an everyday thing in America. One can almost exactly 
date this change. It corresponds to the sudden expansion of enameled sanitary 
86 
fixtures, which almost doubled in number between 1921 and 1923.
2 
S Coke-fired iron boilers were used in the 'eighties. cr. Catalogue of the L. Wolff l\lfg. Co., Chicago, 
Ill., 1885, p.219. For 'Instantaneous Gas Water Heaters,' cf. Catalogue of the Crane Co., Chicago, Ill., 
1893_ 
sa The heating of city blocks by steam was operating in New York in the 'seventies. 
84 
\V. H. _Maguire, Domestic Sanitary Drainage and Plumbing, London, 1890, p.293. 
so Cf. Maguire, op.cit. p.287. 
80 
In 1921 the production of enameled sanitary fixtures (washbasins, bathtubs, etc.) was 2.4 million 
pieces, almost the numbers of the prewar year 1915. It then rose to about 4.8 million a year, reaching 
a temporary maximum of 5.1 million in 1925. 
68S 