46.1. A 'Moorish Bath' seen by an Englishman at the Time of the Islamic Bath Movement, 1858. The 
rest hall (maslak) is portrayed. The aulhor thus describes his experience in the Illustrated London News 
(21 Aprill858): 'The day was lwf, the narrow streets were burning in the glare of noon. The prospect of the 
hot bath was not very inviting. I opened the door of the first apartment ... All around if too.'> a raised platform 
covered with mats on which lay several balkers in the slate of profound repose. I was mounted on a pair of 
wooden clogs. The bath attendant rubbed and pinched and pulled every limb and joint of my body. He kneU 
upon my stomach so that 1 .:ould hardly breathe, wrenched my arms and legs ••• Having been pinched and 
poked and pressed sufficiently, this genius of lhe bath lathered me from head to foot and took in hand a huge 
glove, with which he proceeded to thrub me with the most lively animation. The amount of matter he managed to 
peel off the crust of the body is certainly surprising. Having been well f>'Oused in cool water, I was softly wiped 
and dri'ed by another attendant. This done, he wrapped me up from head to feet in soft towels and led me In 
the outer apartment [maslak], the air of which seemed very much like that of an ice-lwuse. 1 sank exlwusied on a 
divan. And now it1vas ecstatic en.joymenl, it was elysium, nothing seemed wanting to perfect bliss.' 
failure of our time to use naturally available means to awaken man's joy in 
living. One chapter deals with his visit to the bath of a Moroccan Caid, to 
which Urquhart gained access hy ruse. This chapter, later reprinted by itself, 
effectively relates the various stages of the procedure: the loosening of the 
joints; the hot-air rooms, the refined shampoo-massage, followed hy relaxation 
in dim halls. He would use all his eloquence, every means in his power, to con­
vince the West of ita need to assimilate such regeneration. 
Urquhart recalls the nine hundred haths the Spaniards found on capturing 
669 