ANONYMOUS HISTORY 
HrsTORY is a magical mirror. Who peers into it sees his own image in the shape 
of events and developments. lt is never stilled. It is ever in movement, like 
the generation observing it. Its totalit)' cannot be embraced: History hares 
itself onl)' in facets, which fluctuate with the vantage point of the observer. 
Facts rna)' occasionally be bridled within a date or a name, but not their more 
complex significance. The meaning of history arises in the uncovering of rela­
tionships. That is why the writing of history has less to do with facts as such 
than with their relations. These relations will vary with the shifting point of 
view, for, like constellations of stars, they are ceaselessly in change. Every 
true historical image is based on relationship, appearing in the historian's choice 
from among the fnllness of events, a choice that varies with the century and 
often with the decade, just as paintings differ in subject, techuique, and psychic 
content. Now great historical panoramas are painted, now fragments of every­
day things suffice to carry the feeling of an epoch. 
The historian deals with a perishable material, men. He cannot calculate 
the course offuture events like the astronomer. But in common with the astron­
omer, he may see new constellations and hitherto invisible worlds appearing 
over the horizon. And like the astronomer, he must be an ever-watchful spectator. 
His role is to put in order in its historical setting what we experience piecemeal 
from day to day, so that in place of sporadic experience, the continuity of events 
becomes visible. An age that has lost its consciousness of the thiags that shape 
its life will know neither where it stands nor, even less, at what it aims. A civiliza­
tion that has lost its memory and stumbles from day to day, from happeuing to 
happeuing, lives more irresponsibly than the cattle, who at least have their 
instincts to fall back upon. 
History, regarded as insight into the moving process of life, draws closer to 
hiological phenomena. We shall speak little, here, of general lines and great 
events, and then onl)' when necessary to connect occurrences with the bedrock 
in which they are rooted. 
We shall inquire in the frrst line into the tools that have molded our present­
da)' living. We would know how this mode of life came about, and something of 
the process of its growth. 
2 