It was in the 'fifties that the fireproof safe reached its standard form. Widely 
advertised as an excellent American product, it spread from hanks, insurance 
companies, and factmies into the ordinary store and private house. But some 
wonderment even then, it seems, clung to the idea of a catastrophe-resistant 
container. 
Wood's store in this place has been consumed by fire last night .... The heat melted 
the hinges of the doors, a smoke of beat was coming out of the safe containing all our 
hooks and money ... a crowd gathered around to see it opened ... but to their astonish~ 
ment every book, paper and the money came out perfect as far as the paper and the 
7 
writing was concerned.
The development of the fireproof safe and of hank locks coincides with the 
rise of industry, large-scale banking and fmance, the growth of the stock 
exchange, expanding wealth, the multiplication of fortunes. As the first opulent 
residences were being built along Regent's Park in London for the anonymous 
rising class established around 1825 through the development of industry and 
8 
trade, fireproof chests and burglar-proof locks were at hand. 
The Refinement of the Bank Lock 
On the technical side, the mechanized lock of Linus Yale has its roots in the 
complicated mechanism of burglar-proof baak locks. 
The French excelled in everything connected with refined handicrafts, from 
furniture and painting- the lrighest skill of the human hand- to amazingly 
cunning automatons. 
The lock, as normally used since the fifteenth century, keeps the door closed 
by means of a holt held fast by a spring. The key, passed through the key­
hole, directly acts with its winged end on the bolt so that by twisting the key 
one moves the bolt that Jocks or unlocks the door. Its principle is that the bit 
of the key acts directly, without any intermediary, on the bolt. 
The eighteenth century made locks more complicated by inserting, between 
key and bolt, a set of movable plates on pivots. These parallel plates had to 
be aligned by the key before they would allow the bolt to be shot. 
Soon, still in the eighteenth century, England took the lead, keeping it well 
into the middle of the nineteenth, when the United States came to the fore. 
The English developed still more complicated interplay between tumbler and 
bolt, providing the key end tumbler with slits and notches.' 
7 
Herring's Fireproof Safe. Interesting and important information respecting the preservation of 
books, papers, etc., New York, 1854, p.36. 
8 
S. Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture, Cambridge, 1941, pp.460fl'. 
9 
The Barron lock, 1778, forerunner of modern bank locks. 
56 