destroying it. Iron has become as supple as wood. It is twisted at will and changed 
into light and mobile leaves; its coarseness removed, it is animated with a sort 
of life.' 
But it all died out as the Industrial Revolution set in. What the smith had 
formerly forged hy hand out of iron was then entrusted to the mold. Between 
1825 and 184,5, as observed in the report of the jury of the Paris International 
Exhibition of 1867, the highly skilled smiths disappeared from the hig cities. 
Grilles, railings, and balconies had come to he made of cast iron. By the time 
of Haussmann's transformation of Paris under the Second Empire, large finns 
had sprung up, offering stocks of cast-iron pieces, from the continuous balconies 
of the boulevards to cast-iron copies of Michelangelo's sculpture. Their cat足
alogues were like textbooks of art history, and expanded to three or four hundred 
pages. 
But we shall not deal further here with this aspect of mechanization in the 
locksmith's trade. It was unfruitful from the historical point of view, for it 
followed the easy way of mechanization, the sole aim of which is to make copies 
as cheaply as possible. Mechanization in the locksmith's sphere is of historical 
interest only when it chooses the hard way: when it is achieved hy creating new 
methods and new aims. There is no creativeness in the mechanical production 
of cast-iron grilles and ornaments. 
To gain an insight into the real nature of mechanization we shall have to 
confine ourselves to the lock. Nowhere else in this respect did the transition 
from handicraft to mechanical production take place with such speed and effi足
ciency as in the United States. The steps in this change occurred during the 
two decades from 1830 to 1850, decades of outstanding importance in the forma足
tion of American industry's distinctive features. At first, the European practice 
of nsing wrought iron for the various parts of the lock was followed in America, 
'- but almost from the beginning a differentiation began hy the substitution of 
'cast material in place of wrought. . . . This change of material greatly reduced 
3 
the cost of production, and soon led to changes in design .... '
From Handicraft to Mechanical Production 
The change from manual to mechanized production has another starting 
point as well- in hank and safe locks. Out of experience in the construction 
of these expensive locks, costing from $100 to $400, there evolved in the 'sixties 
of the last century a new type of efficient and inexpensive mechanized locks. 
From the late eighteenth century onward, the problem of the burglar-proof lock 
2 
Henry R. Towne, Locks and Builders Hardware, a Hand Book for Architects, New York, 1904, p.39. 
52 
___,._ 
26. Late Gothic Lock of a House at Visp, Switzerland. The wood足
work is relatively rough. The craftsman spent his C(JJ'C in accentuating 
with iron work the signif~eant part of the door, the keyhole, 