discussed everywhere in the 'nineties. At London's exclusive Society of Arts, 
which, we recall, sponsored the first International Exhibition in 1351, a lecturer, 
Crompton, concluded that electric current was 'too expensive to become gen­
74 
eral,' Wherever the question was raised, in Philadelphia or in London, the 
experts were dubious, Only the great inventors saw its possibilities. Nicola 
Tesla, at the start of the 'nineties, foretnld that electricity would soon be used 
as casually as water. 
Even around 1900 people were wondering whetl1er electrieity would ever dis­
place gas. 
The cheapening of current went hand in hand with the gradual introduction 
of the small electric motor. Toward 1910 this trend made itself more strongly 
felt. But the motor was still seen as an outside body, a unit distinct from the 
object to be driven. More usual was the water motor. Leafing through the 
catalogues of the tinle, one immediately notices that the electric motor is a 
rarity. Should a housewife wish an electric motor, instead of the customary 
water motor, the manufacturer warns: 'I can't quote you a price on an electric 
motor to run the washer until I have the information what kind of electric 
current yon have and the voltage,' " 
The Mechanization of Cleaning: Laundering 
IMITATION OF THE HAND 
Eighteenth-Century England: The Americans ever take the lead in mechani­
cally overcoming the difficulties of a complicated craft. This does not mean 
that other countries failed to show an early interest in the problem. Late eight­
eenth-century England turned a slight stream of its tremendous inventive 
current into the modest sphere of washing machines. With the exception of a 
76 
solitary forerunner of 1691, whose mechanism is rather hard to picture from 
the letters patent, invention in this field begins in 1730, bringing new patents 
77 
ahnost each year, five in 1790.
By and large, they are cumbrous constructions moved by cranks, wheels, 
levers, and balances. Like the early steam engines they employ a mighty appa­
ratus to little effect, amid great agitation of pistons, hmers, or sliding trays. 
Even when it clainled domesticity- and the inventor hopefully entitles his 
n J. Chester Wilson, 'Electric Heating,' Engineering Club, Philadelphia, Proceedings, 1895, vol. 12, 
no. 2. 
15 'Motor Self-working Washer,' catalogue c.l906. 
n British Patent No. 271, 27 Aug. 1691. 
77 British Patents Nos.l744,1759,1770, 1772,1786. This period demands more detailed investigation, 
560 