posaJl" (figs. ·i40a and b) dominates the ground plan. The' living kitchen,' he 
explains, 'seeks to make the kitchen an active center of household life, where 
a family can work, play, eat, and spend 90% of its working time and where, 
most important, a housewife can watch children and entertain without leaving 
her work. The living kitchen does this by combining four rooms which are 
usually kept separate: the laundry, the kitchen, the dining room and the living 
room.' Here the house has almost become a dependency of the kitchen. 
Is the kitchen to hecome again the dining room and parlor it was to the petty 
nobleman of seventeenth-century France? In Latin eountries there stiJl survives. 
and not in hostelries alone, the vaulted kitchen at one end of which the cooking 
is performed while at the other the feasting company gathers. 
One thlng is certain: We are continuing to cast off the show values of the last 
century, which sharply isolated the kitchen, even that of a two-room apartment. 
In America the small eating section in the family kitchen never quite died out. 
This breakfast alcove (fig. 339) with collapsible seats is not a satisfactory solu­
tion. Informal dining facilities within the kitchen seem desirable in every serv­
antless household. The most diverse ways of turning the kitchen into a living 
room are suggested, such as closing the sink and range as one might a piano, or 
199 
the nse of folding screens to hide the soiled dishes. In the mechanized house 
there is no reason why the kitchen and the dining room should not be one and 
inseparable. 
The llouse and the ~lechanical Core 
Mechanization hrougbt with it difficulties of its own. There was on one hand 
the wish to use rooms as flexibly as possible and to enjoy the utmost freedom of 
grormd plan; on the other hand, mechanization conflicted with this by seeking 
the utmost concentration of all installations. The costs of mechanization 
arnormted to some 40 per cent of the building costs. If the market is to he broad­
ened, these costs will have to he cut comparably with the lowering of automo­
hlle prices three decades ago. 
The mechanical core of the honse, embracing the kitchen, bath, laundry, 
heating, wiring, and plumbing, will therefore be factory-made and assembled 
hefore heing brought to the building site. From 1927 on, Buckminster Fuller 
has been husy with the idea of the mechanical core. He incorporated the core 
within a mast, which carries the weight of his house. Circular or polygonal 
m Life Magazine, 28 May 1945. 
9
' ~ Charles D. \Viley, First Prize in the Competition for the Design of Small Houses by the United 
Plywood Corporation, in California Arts and Architecture, Feb. 1945. 
625 