itself to the north in Canada and to the south in the Great Plains of Texas. 
Illinois forms the heart and the beginning of the Prairie, just as Chicago became 
the economic and industrial center of the Middle West. 
In his message to the Congress 1 December 1861, Abraham Lincoln, himself 
born in a log cabin of the prairies, defines the Middle West in phrases eqnal to 
their subject: "The Egypt of the West ... the great interior region bounded 
east by the Alleghenies, north by the British dominions, west by the Rocky 
Mountains and South by the line along which the culture of corn and cotton 
meets.' 
The prairies were virgin soil. The nature of this soil varies. Sometimes it is 
loamy and red as in Italy. But it is more often dark brown, crumbling, and 
shot with fme black sand. For thousands of years the hmnus, remains of the 
dead grass and its far creeping roots, bas been accmnulating. To cut through 
this network for the first time, the settlers had to yoke six oxen to the plow; 
thereafter the earth hecame as fine as garden soil and of a surprising fertility. 
One accustomed to the thin layer of bmnus in Europe is surprised when he takes 
a post digger- it may be to plant fruit trees- and finds the loose soil extending 
four feet downwards, and still no end. The bountifulness of this earth drew 
farmers first from the hillsides of Vermont, later from Britain and Western 
Europe. 
Other great plains had been brought under the plow. But the opeuing of the 
Russian plains and of the vast tracts of China extended over centuries. Com­
pared to these the development of the Middle West took place within a few 
decades, ahnost by elimination of tl:te time factor. 
When, through the Pulhnan window, a traveler sees the sun sink beneath 
the cornfields of Illinois, and the next moruing rise again on cornfields as if the 
train had not moved from the spot, he experiences the meaning of dimension as 
figures can but thinly convey it. 
This elimination of time, together with the mystery of dimension, produced 
the mechanization of agriculture. 
How did the development proceed? How did the prairies of Illinois appear 
in this iuitialstage, in 1833? One of our best accounts is that of a Scotsman who 
surveyed the yet undisturbed land with the searching eyes of a farmer. Patrick 
Shirreff of Mungoswells, East Lothian, journeyed across sections of Canada 
and of the Uuited States, mainly to see if his brother might find a means of exist­
ence. He travels from Detroit to Chicago, partly by post, partly hy ox-cart. 
From Chicago Shirreff traverses the prairie to the sooth, on foot, for there was 
142 