implements and electric ovens. Everyone tastes differences in the hread of the 
various local bakers and selects his baker accordingly. 
Only in conntries where the most advanced stages of mechanization have been 
United States and, in this respect, Canada, has the small 
reached, as in the 
baker almost disappeared and mass production become the rule. According 
to the U.S. Census of 1939, corporate enterprise manufactured bread and other 
baked goods (biscuits, crackers, and pretzels excepted) to the value of 514 million 
dollars as against 20 million dollars manufactured hy non-corporate, i.e. small 
66 
estahlislnnents. This went hand in hand with the growing mechanization of 
daily life between 1914 and 1930, and especially in the period 1925-30. 
67 
In this period the hread factory was consolidated into a production unit. 
All operations and machines were co-ordinated and synchronized with clock­
work precision. The manufacture of dough became automatized in all its stages; 
the loaf obtained an extremely even structure and absolute uniformity. 
The dimensions of the ovens have increased over those of 1850; this is true 
of all type"'- steam ovens, draw-plate ovens, rotary ovens- above all of the 
endless-belt type, which has grown to the length of 100 to 130 feet. The term 
'tunnel oven' is no exaggeration. 
Engineers use their thermodynamic experience to insulate the ovens and to 
regulate the heat with great precision. All dirt is kept out; no stoking or coal­
shoveling pollutes the atmosphere, for gas, electricity, or oil have replaced coal. 
The baking chamber is now as clean as a hydroelectric power plant. 
The kneaders with their shiny enamel housings often revezl a surprising 
beauty of form. All sharp edges and corners disappear, the forms have the fluidity 
of a melting ice block. We are in the period of streamline design. The assembly 
to a point 
line, which rolls ahnost without human intervention, has developed 
rarely reached iu other fields. 
Beyond a doubt there is something impressive in the precision, synchronization, 
and cleanliness of a modern bread factory with its hourly output of 30,000 loaves. 
In Philadelphia we visited one of the largest plants of the kind- a five-storey 
66 U.S. Census 1939, vol. l, Statistics and subjects, p.234: 
Number of establishments in corporate ownership- ll60; in non~corporate- 329. 
Wage earners in establishments in corporate ownership- 80,0U; in non-corporate- 3561. 
67 
The data found in scattered articles on the introduc.-tion of the various machines often disagree. 
Nevertheless the development can be ascertained with a certain accuracy. If we start with the turning 
points of full mechanization, the high speed mixers and the gas-fired tunnel ovens, it bf>-eomes clear that 
the present-day tunnel oven of light steel plates and the high..gpeed mixer came into general use after 1928. 
Parallel to this runs their first appearance in serviceable models: the high..speed mixer in 1916, gas-fired 
tunnel oven (with brick walls) in 1917. 
Associated with these are the devices which perform the intermediary and final operations, such as 
loaf molders around 1900, wrapping machines 1913-14, and automatic slicing machines 1928. 
192 