not undergo mechanization as it did in Am.erica, this is not always due to 
incapacity or smallness of scale. Chain restaurants appeared in Paris, bnt it 
was in America that they expanded so as to affect everyday life. Resisting 
mechanization in a given sphere can often mean reluctance to sacrifice quality. 
Where such resistance will he set up, no fixed rule can decide. Industrialization 
marred the quality of cooking in England much more than in America. Eng­
land's insistence on excellence in clothing, on the other hand, is a tradition 
centuries of handicraft. This is the demand for quality, having 
inherited from 
its roots in the guilds of the Gothic towns, a demand that is now at the point 
of re-awakening. 
America had a farming economy. The settlers who came over in the seven­
teenth and eighteenth centuries scarcely differed from their medieval ancestors 
in their modes of living and working. Colonial America, as we shall see, some­
times preserved Gothic elements forgotten in the Old World. From the stage 
of primitive handicraft and a life of medieval austerity, America directly leaped 
into advanced mechanization. 
The Changing Conception of Comfort 
The word 'comfort' in its Latin origin meant 'to strengthen.' The West, 
after the eighteenth century, identified comfort with 'convenience': Man shall 
order and control his intimate surroundings so that they may yield him the 
utmost ease. This view would have us fashion our furniture, choose our carpets, 
contrive our lighting, and use all the technical aids that mechanization makes 
available. 
The notion of comfort means different things to different civilizations. Com­
fort can he achieved in many directions. It amounts to whatever man holds 
necessary for his 'fortifying' his 'strengthening.' 
The Oriental interpretation of comfort requires that man should at all times 
have control over his muscles. Thus the Orient has achieved postures that 
allow the body to find relaxation and comfort within itself. To enjoy such com­
fort, it is enough to take on one of these 'innate' postures, such as squatting 
with one's legs crossed beneath the hody while allowing the muscular system 
to relax. No hack or arm rests are needed; the hody relaxes within and upon 
itself. Moreover, reclining is not used solely to induce sleep, but to favor bodily 
relaxation while taking meals or conversing. 
The Oriental conception contrasts with the Western as represented hy the 
unsurpassed subtlety and skill of tl1e eighteenth century. Western comfort is 
based on the idea of sitting with one's legs hanging down. In this posture the 
hody calls for outside support. 
260 