STREAMLINING AND FULL MECHANIZATION 
Full mechanization and the 'streamlining' habit entered hand in hand to a 
striking degree. In the American mid-'thirties attention converged on re-design­
ing the objects of mass production. How far this was a result of the depression 
and of the need to stimulate sales by playing on emotional responses, and how 
far it may be ascribed to European purifications of form in prior decades, it is 
hard to say. All these factors and others seem to have joined in calling forth 
'streamline style.' 
The streamline, in hydrodynamics, is a curve whose tangent at any point 
gives the direction of the flow of a particle of the fluid at a given point. Stream­
line is thus the graphical representation of a movement, of problems such as 
have been mentioned time and again in the course of this book. 
Streamline form is the shape given to a body (a ship, an airplane) to the end 
that its passage through a material (water, air) may meet with the least possihle 
resistancE'. 
Sinc,e mid-'thirties the word 'streantlined' has considerably broadened in 
connotation, being used in reference to widely dissimilar fields. One speaks of 
strearnlining a business, or, even in the political sphere, an administration or 
government. Here, no doubt, the word unconsciously retains a part of its 
original connotation, i.e., a shape offering least resistance. In the popular sense, 
'streamline' is used interchangeably with the word 'modPrn.' 
From the start, it was understood that the phrase was not to be taken literally. 
Today the layman, unfamiliar with aerodynamics, calls almost everything 
streamlined' when he really means 'graceful lines.' We have 'streamline' radio 
cabinets, toasters, cigarette lighters, and even gasoline with 'streamline' action. 
The development of the science of aerodynamics and its application to airships 
and airplanes has created in the public a sense for fleeting lines, and these lines, 
being recognized by designers as a decorative element, have been emphasized 
to give the impression of speed. The automobile manufacturer, to give the sales 
appeal of a visual impression of the speed that the engineer has built into his 
167 
machine, has used and is using 'streamlining' extcnsively.
Streamlining began on trains. A tubular fonn was given to railroad cars in 
1887.'" But not untill934 was the streamlined train, Diesel driven, with steel 
skeleton and corrugated aluminum skin,'" put into service, whose cars were 
167 
0. Kuhler, 'Streamlining the Railroads,' Product Engineering, New York, vol. VI, 1934, p.221. 
168 By the Meigs Elevated Railroad Construction Co., East Cambridge, Mass. 0. Kubler, op.cit. 
Illustrated. According to Kubler the first attempts to streamline locomotives took place in Kassel (1904) 
and Munich (1912). 
1&.~ The 'Burlington Zephyr' constructed by G. Budd Mfg. Co., Philadelphia. (Ibid.) 
607 