found their practical application in bread manufacture half a century later. 
John Dalton's researches into the 'Absorption of Gases by Water' (1803) are 
especially relevant. 
The solubility of gases increases in ratio with the pressure. The greater the 
pressure over a liquid, the more gas it will absorb. Why should this not apply 
to dough? 
Dr. John Dauglish, a British physician (1824-66), proceeded. from this idea. 
While studying in Edinburgh (1852-5), he experimented with driving carbonic 
acid into dough under a pressure of 10 to 12 atmospheres. In the specification 
43 
of his Improved Method of Making Bread, for which he obtained a patent in 
1856, he states that 'water charged with carbonic acid' had been used before in 
the manufacture of bread, but that the substance of his invention was the mixing 
of charged water and flour under high pressure. High-pressure apparatus to 
saturate water with gas had long been used in the manufacture of soda water. 
There would be little difference, between manufacturing soda water or bread 
by this process; the apparatus would merely have to he somewhat adapted to 
material of a different consistency. Dauglisi) ha<! JlO,,monopoly over such endea足
vors. In the very month of 1857 when his second patent was granted," two 
Americans came forward with 'Improvements in the preparation of dough 
45 
[mixing with gas].' A few years later they brought out a pamphlet, its title 
46 
a strikiug slogan for the aerated product; 'Bread for the Millions.' 
Dauglish too pointed out the advantages of his unfermented bread. In a paper 
at the Society of Arts in London in 1860, he showed that it could be kept 
read 
indefmitely and proved that it was more healthful. The Ameriean authors of 
Bread for the Millions go one step further. They raise the alarm against bread 
made with yeast. 'A fennent or yeast,' 1hey write, 'may be characterized as a 
47 
body in a rotting condition.' Pasteur, who had not long before (1857) dis足
covered the yeast bacilli, might have shown some surprise at this defmition. 
John Dauglish "as a fanatic who wore himself out crusading for his bread, and 
died at the age of forly-two. His name is still associated with the idea. 
His first apparatus was sin1ple. Soda water and flour were mingled under high 
atmospheric pressure in a strong-walled mb:er. When the kneading was com足
plete, the pressure was removed. This allowed the gas to expand, and within 
43 
British Patent 2293, 1 Oet. 1856. 
4
~ British Patent 2224, 21 Aug. 1357. 
4> George Tomlinson Bousfield, 'Improvements in the preparation of dough,' communicated by Perry 
and Fitzgerald of New York, British Patent 2174, 15 Aug. 1857. 
~6 Peny and Fitzgerald, Bread for the Millions, a brief exposition of Perry and Fitzgerald's p~tenl pro足
cess, New York, 1861. With illustrations. 
47 
Ibid. 
I84 