him it kindles. He aJiords the one foothold. They grope in scientific night, 
cautiously feeling their way into the unknown. Now they argue, against ancient 
authority, that the earth turns; now, that it does not. We must take care not to 
read into their theological and Aristotelian conceptions our own mathematical 
conception, one that has been growing in our consciousness ever since Descartes. 
Amid their groping they think as boldly as the Gothic master builders; they 
lay aside the fantastic Aristotelian conception of movement, and put a new one 
in its place- one that still prevails. 
The Fourteenth Century, First to Represent l\iovement 
All that concerns us in this connection is the ·first graphical representation of 
movement. The treatise in which Nicolas Oresme achieves this, the treatise On 
lnl£nsities,' proceeds after the Aristotelian fashion from the general investiga­
tion of the qualities and quantities of an object. Oresme seeks insight into the 
changing intensity of a quality. He determines this by a graphical method. He 
traces the extension (exiensio) of the subject or bearer on a base line that corre­
sponds to Descartes' x-axis of the seventeenth century; and he marks the inten­
sity of the bearer in different stages by straight lines drawn vertically from the 
base line (y-axis). The ratio of the intensities to one another appears in these 
vertical lines. The changing quality of the bearer is represented in the geometri­
cal figure delimited by the summits of the vertical lines. Oresme's treatise is 
accompanied by marginal figures in one of which (fig. 1) the intensities rise 
5 
side by side like organ pipes. The curve they delimit represents variation in 
the quality. 
Oresme carries over this basic method as he investigates the essence of move­
ment, thus gaining insight into the nature of speed (velocitas) and of accelera­
tion. By a graphical method he represents movement, time, speed, and 
6 
acceleration. 
What was new in Oresme's graphical system? Oresme was the first to recog­
nize that movement can be represented only by movement, the changing only 
hy the changing. This is done by repeatedly representing the same subject at 
various times. To portray a subject freely several times in a single picture was 
not unusual in medieval art. One has only to think of the late Gothic works 
in which the same figure (for instance Christ in the stations of the Cross) appears 
4 
TraclaJ.us de uniforrniial.e et difformitate in.fensium. MS. BihliothCque Nationale, Paris. Printed in 
several editions, toward the end of the fifteenth century. 
li See also H. Wieleitner, 'tTeber den Fnnktionsbegriff und die graphische Darstellung bei Oresme,' in 
Zeitschriftfuer die Geschic/Ue der mathemalischen Wissenschaflen, drit.te Folge, vol. 14, Leipzig, 1913. 
6 
Summarized in Ernst Borchert's doctoral thesis 'Die Lehre von der Bewegung bei Nikolaus Oresme,' 
in Beitraege zur Geschiclde und Philosophic des Milklalters, Band XXXI, 3, Miinster, 1934, p.93. 
16 