later lived in a small Massachusetts town and acquired a number of active 
followers in Boston, who, through periodicals and societies, carried on the teach­
ings after his death. Grahamism in diet was later joined in a combined cure 
with Priessnitzian hydropathy." In various forms this union of diet, exercise, 
and water treatment has survived in European countries to the present day. 
More than half a century before mechanization came to dominate life, Sylvester 
Graham uttered the sharpest indictment of its effects. What at that time was 
95 
in its beginnings and mainly limited to the 'vitiated taste of refined society' 
has since engulfed the broad masses of the people . 
. Sylvester Graham's interest in nutrition arose frorn a wish to reconcile man 
with the constants that govern his organism. Sometimes Graham's ideas border 
on the extreme; but on the whole his rules, far in advance of his time, are framed 
96 
with surprisingly sure instinct. He could not know precisely what vital elements 
were stored in the germ or the husk of the grain, or what was the secret of the 
raw fruit and whole vegetable he so zealously advocated. But his one great 
concern is recognizable throughout: food should not be robbed of its most impor­
tant values in the course of preparation. In like manner, we are to read these 
97
lines from the 'Laws of Diet' : 'If man were to subsist wholly on alimentary 
substances in their natural slate, or without any artificial preparation hy cooking, 
then he would he obliged to use his teeth frequently in masticating food and 
hy so doing not only preserve his teeth from decay, hut at the smne time and 
hy the same means, would he thoroughly mix his food with the fluid of his 
mouth.' 
For the same reasons, Graham warns against mashed potatoes, which a!Jnost 
altogether relieve the cater of mastication and reach the stomach as a doggy 
and concentrated mass. Mashing, in onr day, has visibly outstripped all qther 
modes of preparing this food. · 
In the course of our century the preference has become ever more matked 
for foodstuffs that can he swallowed with a minimum of time and effort- from 
chopped me.at (hamburger) to ice crcmn, both of which deserve the title of 
national dishes. Fruit is favoritely taken in liquid form (juices) or diced in small 
cubes (fruit cup). Children, we have noticed, often refuse to eat whole peaches, 
having been brought up largely on sliced fruits. How these trends took shape 
w Dr. T. H. Trail, New York, was successful in the amalg-ctmation of these two tendencies; his periodical 
was maintained under different titles for forty years. (The Water Cure Journal, The Herald of Health, The 
New York Journal of Ilygiene.) Cf. Shryock, op.cit. p.l77. 
gs [Asenath Nicholson] op.cit. 2nd ed., Boston, 1835, p.6. 
oo Ibid., pp.l3ff.: 'l\ules and Regulations of the Temperance Boarding House in New York, 1832.' 
~7 Graham, Treatise on Bread and Breadmaking, Boston, 1837, ch. 'Laws of Diet,' p.l7. 
204 