Convertibility 
Metamorphosis in .~Uechanics 
Just as in the myths of antiquity, a man is changed to a stone or to a tree, 
and nature is peopled with creatures half horse, half man; half fish, half man; 
half snake, half man; so that there is no telling where the animal ends and the 
human hegins, likewise in the singular cre2tions known as patent-furniture it 
is almost impossihle to tell where one category ends and where the next begins. 
They dissolve into one another. Multiformity and metamorphosis are part and 
parcel of their heing. An armchair that changes into a couch, a couch that 
changes into a cradle, can justly he termed combination furniture, as can a 
hed that turns into a sofa, into a chair, into a table, into a railway seat. 
Everything is collapsible, folding, revolving, telescopic, recombinable. Where 
does this part end and that part hegin? No sooner have we reached a clean-cut 
verdict than all is shuffled afresh, leading to no end. The reason lies in the nature 
of this furniture. Part merges with part as, in the mermaid, fish and woman. 
They fuse into a new entity. 
When the medieval period used a piece for multiple purposes, there was 
reason enough in the scarcity of furniture and the primitiveness of the entire 
household. No mechanism was necessary to make chests into potential con­
tainers for every kind of ohject, serving as henches, as sleeping accommodation, 
or as steps rising to the high be,dside. Only in the fifteenth century were chests 
provided with backs. The sixteenth century enlarged the hack rest so that when 
swung up and over it served as a table top. 
This type commemorates the old usage of moving away the table after meals. 
34 
Colonists took this bench-table with them to Pennsylvania (Jig. 259). Peasant 
use simplified the richly ornamented Renaissance type into one so practical 
that it lived on well into the nineteenth century. 
Chairs combined with writing facilities date even further back. The medieval 
practice of resting a small desk on one's knee, as Pythagoras is seen to do in 
the twelfth-century reliefs of Chartres Cathedral (fig. 138), develops during 
the fifteenth century into the comhination of seat with adjustahle writing board. 
Later on, this leads to the broadening of one arm of the Windsor chair so as to 
afford a writing surface, as in Thomas Jefferson's revolving chair of around 1776 
(fig. 161), and as in the chairs of almost any American lecture hall today. 
For its convertible furniture the nineteenth century drew upon the same 
saturation with the mechanical that created adjustahle furniture for sitting 
34 
Kindly communicated to us by Dr. F. Reichman, Librarian of the Carl Schurz Foundation, Phila­
delphia. 
423 