grown, they were suddenly cut off. They had to start from scratch. Imagination 
was given scope to shape reality unhindered. 
The Gothic Roots of the Highly Developed Craft 
Strife and turmoil notwithstanding, the European development had flowed 
on unbroken until mechanization entered upon the scene. The highly developed 
craft has its roots in the late Gothic period. Its rise is inseparably bound up 
with the revival of municipal life. The need for organized living within a com­
munity explains why in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries city life that 
had dwindled more and more began to function again, and why, on both old 
and new cultural soil, cities were founded in numbers exceeded only by the nine­
teenth-century development in America. The modest timber houses of the 
Gothic towns, each with its similar front, and built on an equal lot, formed the 
birthplace of the highly developed handicraft. 
Ouly as the Gothic period was nearing its close, after the raising of the urban 
cathedrals, did the new burgher class set about the creation of an adequate 
domestic setting~ the burgher interior. Down to the nineteenth century this 
late Gothic interior continued as a core of further development. Parallel with 
this, the culture of handicrafts underwent continuous refinement down to the 
time when mechanization finally set in. 
Then a remarkable symbiosis occurs. Handicraft lives on side by side, or 
intermingled with, industrial production, for the Gothic roots did not perish 
altogether. A token of this was the obligation to pass through the traditional 
stages from apprentice to journeyman and master. Even the factory mechanic 
was trained in a similar way. This careful formation in all branches yielded 
excellently qualified workers, and led to the basic divergences, for better and 
for worse, between America and the Continent. The butcher, the baker, the 
joiner, the peasant, have persisted since Gothic times. In a few countries like 
Switzerland, besides the Gothic nucleus of the city, many usages have remained 
alive, even to the way of speech. An inner resistance to mechanization keeps 
it from penetrating over-far into the sphere of intimate living. And when this 
does occur, it is likely to be after hesitation and in the wake of America. 
The complicated handicraft tends however to give to life a certain rigidity 
and slowness. In America, where it is lacking, its absence is compensated for 
by the habit of tackling problems directly. The axe, the knife, saw, hammer, 
shovel, the household utensils and appliances, in short the panoply of instru­
ments whose form had remained static for centuries in Europe, are taken up 
and shaped anew from the first quarter of the nineteenth century on. America's 
original contribution, the mechanizing of the complicated craft, sets in vigor-
39 