and how seriously Lhe time-saving compulsion has recoiled upon the people's 
food are questions for nwre searching enquiry. lf we consider powdered and 
packaged ingredicnls for making soups and cakes, coffee sold ready ground in 
cans, granulated sugar used in prdercnce to the less rapidly dissolving cubes, 
the limits of this ever-growing field seem almost impossible to draw. 
Bread was Graham's starting point, and to bread he always returns. He 
sings the praises of that 'delicious bread' which, he reminisces, the women of 
New England baked uround 1800: 'There was a natural sweetness and richness 
98 
in it which made it always desirable.' Such times were past, and Graham sensed 
this. While bread should be made 'within the precincts of our own thresholds 
... from the best new quality of wheat,' every family being 'furnished with a 
modern patent hand-mi!l,' and while even home yeast 'can be made of a far 
superior quality' to that obtainable from the brewer,'" Graham himself suspected 
that these proposals were condemned in the long run and ran counter to the 
trend of the times. 
Not so far from the possible was his recommendation that bread should have 
a hard protective crust and be kept twenty-four hours before eating. What 
Sylvester Grahan1 taught in 1832 now reads like a warning against blurred 
instincts, a warning of the soft, forever fresh, and crustless bread that the ruling 
taste in most industrialized countries now demands. 
Elsewhere Graham sharply attacks American custom: 
It is a general fault of bread of every description made in this country that it is not 
sufliciently baked. . . . The multitude eat their bread hot and smoking from the oven 
in a half-cooked state. 
Stale bread: this ought to be written in capitals upon every plate. Every child, as 
soon as it has teeth, should be taught to eat stale hard bread. The crust is far preferable. 
It answers more than one good purpose. It is better for the teeth, more palatable to a 
correct taste, rnore suitable to the stomach.wo 
A century later, at the high point of mechanized bread manufacture, the most 
reliable guide, we recall, instructs bakers to make the crust of their bread as 
tender and as thin as possible: 'Some faults in the character of the crust arc: 
too thick, too hard. . . . A desirable character of the crust must be described 
101 
as tender, even surface and unifom1ity ... ' A more radical transformation 
of taste is hard to conceive. 
98 
Ibid. In a few localities it is still possible to corroborate Graham's remarks, In the high valley of 
Wallis Canton in Switzerland, along with late Gothic houses and language of late Gothic plasticity, some­
thing of the strength of that period has been pret~erved in the native bread. It has a distinctive content 
which, as Graham says of the bread of New England, makes it 'always desirable.' 
99 Ibid. pp.39, 4.9, 13'!. 
100 
Ibid. p.97. 
101 Wihlfahrt, op.cit. p.380. 
205 