The Bath in the Nineteenth Century 
The type of hath prevailing in our day is, as we have said, hut a mechanized 
version of Lhe primitive type, which superficially cleanses the hody from the 
outside by ablution or iuunersion in water of a given temperature, This mode 
of bathing has as its symbol the bathtub, 
The bathroom with running water, and its standard fixtures- tub, wash­
basin, and toilet- are the outcome of a long wavering. Which type was to 
prevail in our period hung in the balance through the nineteenth century as 
late as the 'nineties. This vacillation between the types- hot-air bath, steam 
bath, tub, or simple shower- will form our subject here. To which type shall 
preference he given? This question arises time and again. The Encyclopredia 
Britannica's view in 1854 may be indicative: 'The vapour hath is infinitely 
superior to the warm hath for all the purpoaes for which a warm hath can be 
given, An effective vapour bath may easily be had in any house at little cost 
42 
and trouble.' The solution offered seems reminiscent of what was practiced 
tlnough the centuries. A brick, having been heated in the oven, is placed in 
a basin, water is poured over it to produce steam, while the bather, wrapped in 
a towel, sits on a chair. 
From 1850 to the early 'nineties, strong endeavors were made to introduce 
communal baths affording fuller regeneration- hot-air or steam baths aided 
hy massage and gymnastics - rather than the primitive bath within the dwell­
ing, Again, in the early 'eighties, the shower was advocated in preference to the 
bathtub for private houses as well as for the public baths of the working class, 
It may not be superfluous to recall that even in America, which was later to 
surpass all countries in this sphere, the tub remained a luxury until the twentieth 
century, American tenements around 1895 had no bathing facilities. Such 
amenities were held desirable, hut usually in the shape of showers rather than 
tubs: 
A great step forward in the improvement of tenement houses would be made if they 
were provided with bathing facilities. As at present constructed, even the best of them 
have absolutely no bathing facilities. The reason therefore is ... that tubs without hot 
water would rarely be used. . . . I am firmly convinced that the shower bath offers many 
advantages for the tenement houses. . . . It is not necessary to provide each tenement 
with a bath." 
Five out of six dwellers in American cities, a survey revealed in the 'eighties, 
had' no facilities for bathing other than such as are provided hy pail and sponge.'" 
12 
Encyclop;edia Britannica, Boston, 1854, vol. 4, p.507. 
43 
William P. Gerhard, On Bathing and Different Forms of Baths, New York, 1895, p.23. 
u Ibid. p.l6. 
659 