upholstered furniture aud the mechanization of adortmlent during the first 
half century has shown us how this easy way was condemned to linger in the 
transitory. 
The second way of mechanization in furniture led to solutions hitherto 
unknown. Here the mechanical was used to aid and support the human organ­
ism. The furniture was constructed by engineers, not designed by upholsterers. 
Its inventors arc practically unknown and uncounted. Now they create a com­
pletely new type; now they devise a new and simple means of movability. They 
belong to the anonymous history of the century. The inventor's name heads 
each patent spedfication. But it is only a name among other names, drifting 
past one's eyes like tbe names and numbers of a telephone directory. In the 
agglomerate, they form a storehouse of ideas largely unused and of experience 
lost. 
The Decades of Patent Fnrniture, 1850-90 
The patent furniture of the nineteenth century has its distinct place in the 
history of comfort. It forms a link joining the ingenious French and English 
furniture of the eighteenth century with the attempts of our own time to adapt 
furniture to posture in simple ways. 
The development from Sheraton to 1850 is but fragmentarily known. We 
Jack detailed research into the constituent trends. Certain it is that in France 
and England during the first half of the century the development continues, if 
only as a lesser stream. Its keynote is a stronger emphasis on the mobile and the 
technical. 
From 1850 on, America takes the lead and raises patent furniture to a stature 
never approached in Europe. The preparatory phase, from 1830 to 1350, is 
still tentative. Toward 1860, in pace with the growing activity of invention, 
an overwhehning rush sets in that culminates, within a decade, in a high degree 
of technical proficiency. The knack of solving the motion prohlems of furniture 
grows so rapidly that during the 'eighties - here again in step with other fields 
- it reaches a maturity to which little could he added. 
In the 'nineties an influx of European ruling taste flooded America. Well 
known as the turning point is the Chicago World's Fair of 1893. The attitude 
that it enthrone,d- a surrender to copied Classical architecture in direct supply 
from the French Academy - rejected the flat machine-made surfaces of Ameri­
can equipment as too meager, and the patent furniture as ridiculously out of 
place. Mechanized furniture disappeared from living quarters. People began to 
be ashamed of it. From then on, the whole movement gathered around furniture 
for special, technical purposes. Patent furniture was banished from the house, 
393 