Spectators were shocked by the contrast. 
'At the exhibition the visitor will see flowers and leaves and fruit of a size 
such as was never seen in this world before. He will find his eyes dazzled and 
perplexed by moss-roses that give him a headache with their brightness.' Then 
follows the question, what are carpets for? 'The uses of a carpet are no 
mystery. In the first place make your carpet a background for setting your 
furniture appropriately and well. Now is that to be done by broad and startling 
contrasts of color, which are constantly drawing the eye downwards instead 
29 
of allowing it to rest agreeably upon other objecl'?' 
On one band was mechanization, implemented by the most highly differ­
entiated means; on the other, primitive, labor-consuming handicrafts. The ques­
tion imposed itself: 'Does the process of civilization and the increased value 
of knowledge and labor destroy principles of taste?' For the first time it 
202. HENRY COLE: Society 
of Arts Competition, 1845. Tea 
.Service 'For Common Use.' 
This popular tea service represents 
one of the early endeavors to im­
prove public taste: 'A model of 
plain and cheap earthen ware. 
The aim has been lo obtain as 
much beauty and ornament as is 
comrnensurale wilh cheapness. 
Ornament..~ on l}w handles are so 
deRigned as not to interfere with 
the simplicity of the outlines. The 
cup, being much deeper than wide, 
rdferR least scope for the radiation 
of hf'ai.' ~ Fifty Years of Public 
Life. (Courtesy the Society of 
Arts, London) 
became clear that the degree of industrialization is no measure of culture or of 
our ability to shape life. Since then it has become ever more apparent that 
intensive mechanization rarely coincides with the mastery of living. 
With the exhibits so closely juxtaposed, no one could deny that the so-called 
primitives knew dignity and had contact with the material. The Europeans, 
as soon as they left the safe ground of neutral fabric, betrayed insecurity in 
their mixture of ornament and naturalism no less than in their use and abuse 
of materials. As an article in The Times on 'Universal Infidelity in Principles 
of Design' expressed it, 'The absence of any fixed principles in ornamental 
29 
The whole atlitude of the article, which appeared in the London Times, reflects the circle aronnd 
Henry Cole; Cole reprinted it in the Journal of Design, vol. v (1851), pp.l58~9. 
351 