cation.' But this is not all. The malerial of which it is made must be suited 
to these requirements. lt shall be unbolted and coarsely ground wheat. Bread, 
Graham held, should retain something of 'the delicious flavor and delicate 
sweetness which pure organs perceive in the meal of good new wheat juot take-n 
from the ear.' He goes a step further. He knows bow important is the soil in 
which the grain was ripened and the fertilizer used to enrich this soil. Here he 
draws close to the investigations of recent times. 
Soil, flour, bread, were conceived as forming an indivisible entity in relation 
with another entity, the human organism. Sylvester Graham wished to restore 
man's contact with the organic. Nutrition was his medium. 
Romantic nature sentiment merges with eighteenth-century back-to-nature 
trends in a smnmons to natural living. Graham saw nutrition as the way, just 
as the Silesian peasant, Vincent Priessnitz (1799-1851), saw water as the means 
of direct access to what was central in man's nature. \Vhen we come to speak 
of regeneration in the nineteenth century we shall see how Priessnilz, the founder 
of hydropathy, performed his cold-water cures between 1830 and 1850, using 
cold rub-downs, baths, and showers to treat chronic maladies, to harden and 
restore circulation in bodies debilitated by soft living. In their approach, both 
Graham and Priessnitz follow the lines which Jean-Jacques Rousseau laid down 
half a century earlier and which by 1830 had broadened into a general 
consciOusness. 
Sylvester Graham came of an early settled Colonial family of Connecticut 
preachers. As a child he was none too sturdy. He knew hard times in his youth, 
and having tried several vocations became a Presbyterian minister like his father. 
In Philadelphia, where he had his first congregation, he associated with Quakers 
and temperance men, although abstinence interested him far less than the way 
our body interacts with the nutriment it takes in. He studied physiology and 
anatomy. 'The laws of relation under which man exists' engaged his attention, 
91 
as did 'the reciprocities and mutual dependencies of mind and body.' 
His rise began in 1832 when the cholera was ravaging hoth Europe and 
America. This epidemic led to the improvement of London's sewage system and 
the first housing settlements for the working class. Sylvester Graham, in well­
attended le.ctnre.s at Clinton Hall, New York, advocated a return to natural 
eating habits as a preventive of disease. He. gained a large following." Hotels 
93 
observing his rules were established in New York and other cities. Graham 
91 
Graham, Lectures on the Science of Human Health, Boston, 1839, p.J2. 
n Graham, Aesculapian Tablets of the Nineteenth Century, Providence, 1831·. Some hundred pages 
are devoted to testimonials which show that his ideas aroused great public interest at the time. 
93 
The rules and mode of life in one of these boarding houses are briefly described and explained by 
Graham himself in [A. Nicholson's] Nature's Own Book. 
203 