hogs. The assembly line attitude is present hefore it can he applied in mecha­
nized form to complicated machine processes. 
The assembly line is based upon the speediest, most nearly frictionless 
transportation from each fabrication process to the next. Conveyor systems are 
employed to this end. It was Oliver Evans who first incorporated the three hasic 
types of conveyor, as still used today, into a continuous production line. 
Toward 1830 a new influence appeared: the introduction of railways. They 
aroused the imagination of the world. The rail and carriage seemed the most 
perfect means of transportation. Attempts were soon made to use them in the 
most diverse branches of industry. 
In 1832 the patent was granted in France for a continuous oven 'in the form 
of a large circnlar track. The hread was taken around and haked in the course 
3 
of the trip.' It may he regarded as symptomatic. But in England during that 
decade, important inventions were made, hased on the use of tracks and trolleys. 
Among these is the traveling crane-- apparently invsnted by Johann Georg 
Bodmer in 1833 - which conld move weights along a horizontal path high over­
head. It was Bodmer who, as we shall see, laid down tracks within a Manchester 
factory, on which the material was moved in cars directly to the machines. 
The horizontally traveling crane forms a step toward the overhead-rail 
systems that appeared on a large scale in American slaughterhouses of the 
Middle West during the late 'sixties-and finally came into use in the mass fabri­
cation of automobiles (Henry Ford, 1913). 
The assembly line in the present-day sense was originally used in food 
processing when Oliver Evans first applied it in 1783 to grain-milling. In 
1833 biscuit manufacture was mechanically performed in 1m English 'victualling 
office,' the baking trays heing conveyed from machine to machine through the 
oven and hack to their starting point on continuously moving roller-heds. In 
the late 'fifties the more difficult process of hread haking hecame mechanized 
at various places in England and Amerka; and in America, at this time, even 
fruit was dried in steam chambers with the help of a conveyor hy a now for­
gotten method (Alden process); in the late 'sixties overhead rails, in combina­
tion with various machines, are found in the great meat-packing houses of the 
Middle West. 
Every detail of conveyor systems of interest to the engineer or the manu­
facturer possesses an ahnost endless literature;- hut one not very helpfnl for 
our purpose. The origin of the assembly line, its ahnost unnoticed growth 
through an entire centnry to virtual dictatorship over everything and everyone, 
is above all a historical, a human problem. Perhaps that is why we are so ill-
3 Arihert's patent. 
78 