By virtue of the American cihnate, corn forms the most important feed for 
livestock. Its improvement an4 rise in production willrin a few years border 
on the marvelous. The first at~empts to raise hybrid corn commercially were 
in the 'twenties. It did not become available in quantity before the early 'thirties. 
Then, within four years, 1935 to 1939, a fivefold increase occurs. The area sown 
with hybrid corn is extended from about a half-million acres to twenty-four 
million acres. This represents Mer a quarter of the total production.' 
Hybrid corn clusters around the coh in exceptional abundanoe and regularity. 
It is more prolific (15 to 30 per cent), more resistant, and more handsome.' A 
noteworthy fact was observed in the second generation of corn sown freely in 
the fields; it lost some of its desirable characteristics. The farmer must there­
fore purchase his seed from raisers, in whom seed-production tends to become 
increasingly centered. 
The Egg 
One instance at least may serve to show how the eighteenth century took 
analysis and experiment as its starting point in the mechanization of growth. 
The Egyptians were masters in the use of incubators for clrickens. Even in 
more recent times they had not quite forgotten their skill. In the eighteenth 
century, Berma, a village of the Nile Delta, still lived by art.ificial chicken rais­
ing, the secrets of wlrich had been handed down from father to son. Thirty 
thousand fowl were hatched at a time, Reaumur reports, and sold by the bushel. 
Just as exotic flowers were transplanted to northern climes, so a native of this 
Egyptian village was brought to Florence by the grand duke of Tuscany, that 
the court might enjoy young chicken in all seasons. In 1747 Antoine Ferchault 
de Reaumur, the great natural scientist, addressed the Paris Academy on the 
topic of chlchen incubators, with sensational success, as his biographer tells us, 
for to have roast chicken on the table the year round was at that time a tempt­
ing dream.' 
4 
In some parts of the corn belt, in Iowa, for instance, hybrid corn amounts to 77 per c,ent. Cf. Tech­
rwlogy on the Farm, op.cit. p.l36. 
5 
To regulate the crossing and to develop the varieties as desired, the ears must he prevented from 
becoming accidentally fertilized and the female plants from fertilix!ng themselves. In normal circum­
stances the matured pollen grains would f~ll by the laws of chance from the corn tassels on the silk ear 
shoots and fertilize them. Male and female plants are therefore separated. Between every two or four 
feminine rows one masculine row is placed. The tassels of the female plants are pulled before they she61 
any pollen. This process is repeated at regular intervals, so that the whole field is fertilized exclusively hy 
male plants of determined quality. At harvest time the male plants are eliminated, and only the grain on 
female cobs is used for further raising. This process - inbreeding ~ has to be continued for Gve to seven 
years. Described in further detail in Technology on ll~e Farm, op.cit. ch. 21, and in more popular form in 
William R. Van Dersal, The American Land, Its History and Its Uses, New York, 1943, pp.M-7. 
6 
Jean Today, op.cit. pp.303-14. 
248 