informed about its growth. ·we have no broad survey of the subject, or, appar­
ently, any article outlining the history of this pre-eminent tool of production. 
Intimately connected with the assembly line is a problem that has slowly 
grown to importance since 1900: scieniifr.c management. Scientific management 
like the assembly line has much to do with organization. Very early in his 
experiments during the 'eighties, its founder, Frederick Winslow Taylor, was 
regulating the speed of various machines by means of individual drive, and 
became one of the first to use electric motors for this purpose. But of greater 
significance is scientific management's investigation of the v;ay human work is 
performed. 
Its development has led partly to the alleviation of lahor, partly to heedless 
exploitation of the worker. 
Its finest result was the new insight into the nature of work and motion arising 
from investigations such as Frank B. Gilbreth's. The way Gilbreth made visible 
the elements as well as the path of human motion is masterly hath in the method 
and the boldness of its application. This aspect of the research, deeply probing 
the human element, will, we believe, prove the most significant in the long run. 
The Continuous Production Line in the Eighteenth Century 
Oliver Evans 
\Vhat is most typical of American industry today, production in continuous 
flow, was a central preoccupation from the first. Before any American industry 
had come into heing, and long before it was building complicated machines, a 
solitsry and prophetic mind set ahout devising a system wherein mechanical 
conveyance from one operation to another might eliminate the lahor of human 
hands. 
4 
In the last quarter of the eighteenth century, Oliver Evans (1755-1819) 
huilt a mill in which the grain passed smoothly and continuously through the 
various milling processes without the help of human hand. It flowed in a smooth 
and continuous production line. 
Oliver Evans introduced the endless belt and different types of conveyors, 
regulated to one another in all stages of production. The 'endless belt' (helt 
conveyor), the 'endless screw' (screw conveyor), and the 'chain of buckets' 
(bucket conveyor), which he used from the very start, constitute to the present 
day the three types of conveyor system. Later these three elements became ex­
haustively teehnified in their details, hut in the method itself there was nothing 
to change. 
4 Particulars on the inventor's life and work will be found in the painstakingly documented work of 
Greville and Dorothy Bathe, Oliver Evanlt, Philadelphia, 1935. 
79 