resentative furniture of nineteenth-century ruling taste. 'I'his occurred in the 
late 'thirties following the success of Delacroix's and Decamps' painting. 
The Divan: Needless to say, the Oriental influence was not native to the 
'thirties. The Louis XV cabinetmakers, for instance, created the elegant tur­
quoise, with its three-cushion seat and other loose cushions against the wall. 
Again Thomas Sheraton designed a 'Turkish sofa,' fronted by two columns, 
suggesting au alcove. U-sbaped, it modestly skirts the end of the room, quite 
unlike the uineteenth-century types, which seek to display their bulk. 
The nineteenth century opens a new chapter. The devaluation of symbols 
went hand in band with the devaluation of space. Furniture became a means 
of filling the room; to inflate its bulk was the first step. 
In 1834, the year of Delacroix's 'Femmes d'Algerie,' Balzac's description of 
a boudoir in La Pille aux yeux d' or conveys this softened atmosphere, which 
developed with the century; his fancy turns around an enormous Turkish divan. 
'One half of the boudoir made a softly graceful curve in contrast with the per­
fectly square half of the room. The horseshoe contained a Turkish divan, that 
is, a mattress laid on the floor, but a mattress as large as a bed, a white cash­
mere divan fifty feet around. The head of this tremendous bed rose several 
feet above abundant cushions.' Fondness for cushions is also reflected in Bouing­
1826 (fig. 233). 
ton's 'Reclining Woman' of 
Divans penetrated public places, too, although in the more austere shape of 
upholstered benches. This furniture gave its name to the locale, then called 
cafe divan. They first appeared in Parisian literary cafes. 'The first divan 
opened in Paris around 1838. For years the cafe-divan of the rue Pelletier was 
67 
familiar to artists.' The Romanticists, Gerard de Nerval and Balzac himself, 
were frequent visitors. This cafe disappeared around 1859, when Haussmann 
began his transformation of Paris." 
In the Paris of 1850, divan-benches sprang forth everywhere, even in public 
arcades. They remain in Parisian restaurants to this day, and determine the 
arrangement of the tables parallel to the walls. 
Fancy Chairs-Sieges defantaisie: It was a point of honor with the French 
upholsterers to launch endlessly new types with new nan1es, just as at a later 
time American ranges or refrigerators were redesigned every year, rousing envy 
afresh. These sieges de faniaisie, or fancy chairs, as the French aptly called them, 
were a furniture of fashion, and models lived their short season like modish hats. 
G1 Larous.'le, Dictionnaire du XJXm• siet:le, Paris, 1870, art. 'Divan.' 
tS Ibid. 
372 