89. Conlinuous Production Line: U S. Patent, 1836, 'Machine for Harves1ing, Thre._Wi:ng, Cleaning 
and Bagging Grain.' Constructed in the wilderness of Michigan in 1836, this earliest combine, harvesting 
without human hands, manifests the same /.rend as Oliver Eva.w/s achievement in the milling production line, 
1783. Abor.d a hundred years had to paRs before the combine, which aulomalical~y reaps, threshes, and bags 
the grain, became available for fhefamify-sizefarm. (U.S. Pa.fent, 20 June 1836) 
In the 'eighties, the 'harvester-thresher' appeared in California. Here an equa­
ble climate prevailed, and there were giant honauza farms where large machinery 
paid. As many horses were harnessed to these automats as might he used for 
the shifting of an obelisk. And the locomobile did not solve the problem. 
The tractor alone had the adaptability that was needed. Around 1920, there 
was continuance of the Californian giants, which cut a 16- to 20-foot swathe. 
Their. size and their price were progressively lessened, until, hy 1939, the midget 
combine was introduced, which cuts 40-inch swathes, costs little more than a 
grainhinder, and gives to the small farmer 'an advantage in harvest-costs here­
72 
tofore held hy operators of large holdings.' 
Comparable machines are used at the start of production. The wheat-harvest­
ing combine is but an exponent of the ruling trend: simultaneous performance 
of formerly distinct operations. Whether to sow wheat or to plant potatoes, 
the tilling, the preparation of the seed-bed, the fertilizing, all are made to flow 
in a continuous production-line. 
The Homestead and the Factory Farm 
Yonder, in the vast gambrel-roofed barn, stands the machinery of the American 
farmer. And near hy, 160 acres of grass, wheat, or corn land arc ready to he 
reaped. Three people suffice to carry on the work. Twenty cows in the stalls 
are milked hy machines, which automatically stop as soon as the udder runs dry. 
12 Technology on !he Farm, op.cit. p.l4. 
164 