MECHANICAL SKINNING 
The earlier the time, the more boldly do the inventors attempt to replace 
complex hand-operations hy mechanical devices. Skinning, too, was to be mechan足
62 
ically performed. It would be done through a system of levers and pulleys, 
while the animals - cattle in this case - were moored to the floor hy head 
and legs. The drawing of this invention (fig. 122), to which a certain artistic 
charm cannot he denied, shows a half-skinned cow with its hide drawn hack; 
the head, already loosened hy the knife, lies in the foreground. In 
the skin of 
the rear one sees the head and horns. This machinery must have heen unsuc足
cessful, for even today skinning is done hy hand. 
All machinery seems to he ruled out when it comes to skinning, the separation 
of the hide from the flesh. 'The head skinner, who skins the head and severs 
it from the body, handles his knife with so much skill that he can skin the head 
of the animal and sever it exactly at the junction of the skull and vertebra in 
the fraction of a minute.' 
Sheep are skinned as they travel on a conveyor. This operation is neverthe足
less entirely hand-performed, and a whole team of workers divides the task into 
individual operations. The final stroke is given hy hack skinners who 'seize 
the pelts and pull them loose from the hack of the lambs so as not to break the 
grain of the pelts or tear the tender fat of the rump and hack.' This is done in 
one motion. It seems easy and simple as the fleece is torn with a sharp crash 
from the hody, but it requires great skill. Above, the naked carcass moves on 
with the assembly line, trailing the fleece like a mantle through the crimson 
carpet of blood, which forms everywhere along the conveyor's path. 
MECHANICAL HOG SCRAPING 
Most attempts to handle organic substance by mechanical means failed. Only 
in one operation was the machine introduced with at least partial success. Char足
acteristically, this operation was not on the inside of the body. It was the task 
of mechanically removing hair and bristle from the softened carcass as soon as 
it left the scalding vat. This is accomplished hy a large shaving device designed 
to rid the whole body of hair thoroughly and in the shortest possible time. 
Just as in mechanical dough mixers the kneading, heating, and pulling hand 
is replaced hy metal pounders, scTews, or other mechanisms, so in shaving the 
hog the knife-wielding hand, which so readily adapts itself to the contours of 
the hody, gives way to a mechanical device. 
The dough mixer was invented in Europe and was not used in America until 
62U.S. Patent 63,910; 16 Apr. 1867. 
236 