century. They are flashes of lhe inventive mind, which slipped unnoticed into 
oblivion until the electric motor suddenly raised them to prominence. It is 
nevertheless a task of the historian to ensure the shedding of their anonymity. 
THE VACUUM CLEANER C. 1900 
The portable machines were arrived at hy a wide detour. Just as the electric 
motor had to pass through the gigantic before giving rise to a reliable small 
motor, so time was needed before the automatically driven vacuum cleaner 
could he reduced to an implement of convenient size. As the vacuum cleaner 
gradually took shape, shortly before 1900, it was a considerable plant, an instal足
lation suitable on!~ to hotels, department stores, or railroad terminals. 
Three phases can he distinguished before the vacuum cleaner was finally 
introduced. 
At first carpets were sent to special centers, often connected with laundries, 
for cleaning. There bulky carpet-heating machines were used. These carpet 
heaters, like the washing machines of the first half of the century, imitated 
human motions-- in this case the arm swinging a carpet heater. The first 
130 
patents appear around 1860. Even after 1900 an English handbook on Laundry 
Management surveys the diverse systems without any mention of the vacuum 
cleaner. 
Stationary installations within the hnilding formed the second phase. Pipe足
lines connected the suction machines in the basements of large establishments 
with outlets throughout the edifice. This explains why around 1900 vacuum 
131 
apparatus might he made hy the central-heating mannfacturers. America 
was first to develop installations of this sort. 
In the third phase, frequently co-existent with the second, mobile plants on 
wheels were used. By hand, hy horse, or hy motor, they were moved from house 
to house. A long flexible hose waR taken into the apartment from the street 
or court where the cleaning unit was stationed. At least two men were needed 
to run this outfit, one to look after the machinery, another to do the cleaning. 
Such mobile plants were developed hy the French and especially hy the Eng足
lish. H. C. Booth, inventor of what the English claim to he the first satisfac足
tory vacmun eleaner, recalls his experiences in the early days, between 1901 
and 1903: 'Jt was asstnned by the police authorities that the machine [the 
130 
Three patents for carpet-beating machines were taken out in 1860: U.S. Patent 27,730, 28,389, and 
30,590. 
131 
Laundry Management, a Handbook for Use in Private and Public Laundries, 4th vol. London, 1902, 
ch. 23: 'Carpet Beating.' 
586 