You will note that all of these lay-outs embody the conventional shape and 
design of fixtures. 
What are the trends concerning future types of bathtubs and bathrooms? 
Q. 10. 
Will the present-day trend for small bathrooms with built-in bathluh• be 
continued? 
At the present time, there are no trends that indicate a change in the shape 
A. 
or size of bathrooms for postwar use. The only other type bathroom layout 
that was used just prior to the war embodied the square-type tub, and I 
am enclosing a circular showing bathroom arrangements embodying this 
type of tub. We intend to continue this type of square tub after the war. 
Q. 11. Will the trend, every bedroom with adjoining bathroom, be further de­
veloped? 
A. As regards the trend of a bathroom for every bedroom, this has become 
rather accepted general practice amongst leading architects and builders 
throughout the country; in fact, the real requirements for good homes at 
the present time are a bathroom for each bedroom and a powder room or 
a small washroom on the main floor adjoining the living-room and the 
dining-room for guest use. At the present time, we do not see any trend 
indicating a change from this overall specification of requirements for 
homes. 
Chieago, Ill., May 1944. 
The double-shell tub is a product of full mechanization. The highly skilled 
workers, formerly essential in every phase of its production, are no longer 
needed. No hand touches the mold. A mechanism automatically distributes 
the sand. The castings are seriaJl)~ poured, cooled, and scoured. Automatic 
sifting devices lay on an even coating of powdered enamel prior to fusion in the 
110 
kiln.
If the bath and its equipment passed from a nomadic to a stable condition 
in the course of the nineteenth century, the growing popularity of the built-in 
tub meant its passing from the status of furniture to incorporation in the 
organism of the house. 
1 ts incubation period at an end, the bath merged into this organism with 
no In 1916. At this time earthenware tubs were first put into mass production. It was the enameled 
cast-iron tub that prevailed, but the mass manufacture of earthenware served to popularize the wash~ 
basin and water-closet fixtures. 
Pre\'iou,ly the clay was 'placed on the mold and shaped by hand to get the impression. The making 
of the thickness was left entirely to the skill of the operator with the result that thicknesses varied' 
(Standard Potteries, Technical Article, n.d,, p.3). Thi"' complex handicraft was eliminated when china­
ware came to he cast in molds. Europe had succeeded in liquefying the clay hy addition of water and 
chemical salts (1906). The Americans took over this method, and after some ten years of experiment 
built factories in which the liquid clay was distributed through tubes. This fluid was poured into plaster 
molds, which absorbed the water content. The result was a product of perfectly uniform thickness. The 
tubs were then baked in tunnel kilns, just like bread at the same period, their passage through the kiln 
being as accurately controllable as that of the loaves. 
705 