notions of the chain, forms it of open links and closed ones, which carry the 
brooms, Carried on the endless chain, the brushes raise the dirt np the inclined 
carrier plate, and dump it into the container. Whitworth's street sweeper, the 
first to perform tbe task mechanically on a broad scale, reveals in all its details 
the tonch of one skilled in the improvement of complex spinning apparatus, the 
engineer who around mid-century had brought machine building to a higb level 
126 
of precision.
EARLY STAGES OF THE VACUUM CU~ANER 
V.'hen we listed the cleaning appliances chronologically and by type at the 
start of this section, we found the vacuum cleaner based on pure suction appear· 
121 
ing in 1859. It was no chance occurrence. This was a time of many projects, 
often fantastic ones, exploiting the gases, air-pressure, or atmospheric vacuum, 
and ranging from the injection of carbonic acid into dough to the Bessemer 
process's blasting of air through molten iron, or to primitive proposals using 
air suction to clean carpets. Only a few months after tbe first mechanical (brush) 
carpet sweepers (1859), there appeared the vacuum applianc-es already men­
wheels drove a four-bladed fan (fig. 373). Also fonn ulated at this 
tioned, whose 
time (1860) was the second type of vacuum cleaner, which combined revolving 
brnsbes witb a continuous draft."' The brushes sweep the dust into the draft 
129 
produced by bellows driven by a connecting rod attached to the wheels 
(fig. 412). 
Let us anticipate and glance at what was to follow. These two appliances, 
tbat of 1859 and that of 1860, created the basic types, in which the principles 
underlying the whole development down to the present day were emhodied. 
The bolder principle, that of 1859, which carried the dnst away by suction 
the fixed American installations after 
alone, was nsed on a magnified scale in 
1900, as well as in the mobile apparatus of England and France. 
Tbe second type, that of 1860, which nsed air draft together with rotating 
brushes, was continually improved in its hand-driven fonn during the nine­
teenth century and the beginning of tbe twentieth. Successfully electrified after 
1910, it then began to displace the fixed installations. 
The type of 1859, nsing suction alone, also flourishes today in the portable 
field. Botb types number among the shelved inventions of tbe nineteenth 
tw He built planers accurate to the millionth of an inch. 
121 Cf. the section on 'Bread and Gas' in our chapter on 'Bread.' 
12su.s. Patent 29,077,10 July 1860. 
l29 'The nature of my invention consists in drawing fine dust and dirt through the machine by means of 
a draft of air and [this suggestion is interesting at so early a date] forcing the same into water or ... any­
thing else which will retain the dust.' '\Vhy not then into an airtight bag, as later became the rule? 
585 