fort, of our attitudes- we are stopped at every turn by gaps and unanswered 
questions. 
We know furthermore that isolated studies are inadequate to embrace the 
complex structure of the nineteenth century. More than the hare history of 
an industry, an invention, an organization, we have to observe what was occur­
ring in various other fields at the same time. Then we see that without conscious 
forethought phenomena simultaneously arise, bearing striking similarities to 
one another. They need only be displayed side by side to call into consciousness 
the tendencies and sometimes the meaning of their period. 
Iron filings, these small insignificant particles, hy the interference of a magnet 
become form and design, revealing existing lines of force. So, too, the details of 
anonymous history can be made to reveal the guiding trends of a period. 
Our task is clearly outlined: to inquire how our contemporary life, with its 
mixture of constituent and chaotic elements, came about. The difficulty lies 
in sifting and separating those facts that may he called constituent and that 
are the true pointers of their age. Once this has been done the material does 
the rest. 
Anonymous history is directly connected vrith the general, guiding ideas of 
an epoch. But at the same time it must be traced back to the particulars from 
which it arises. 
Anonymous history is many sided, and its different departments flow into 
one another. Only with difficulty can they be separated. The ideal in anony­
mous history would be to show simultaneously the various facets as they exist 
side by side, together with the process of their interpenetration. Nature does 
this in the eye of the insect - a lens of multiple facets- fusing its distinct 
images of the outer world into an integrated picture. The individual does not 
have such power. We must be grateful if this objective is fulfilled only in the 
fragment. 
PROCEDURE 
In Space, Time and Architeclnre we attempted ID show how our period came 
to consciousness of itself in a single field, architecture. 
Now to broaden the scope, we shall observe the coming about of mechaniza­
tion, that almost unescapable influence over our way of life, our attitudes, our 
in•tincts. 
We shall deal with mechanization from the human standpoint. Its results 
and its implications cannot be simply stated. The prerequisite is that we should 
4 