'\VE HAVE NO GlJIDING PlUNClPLES' 
6 
The lesson of the Exhibi t.ion was wide1y discussed hy contemporaries, ~ who 
asked what conclusions it held for time to come. Henry Cole tried to save for 
the future the guiding principle: Learning to see, Seeing by comparing. He 
31 
transplanted them into educational practice.
Industry itself could not be held in check; production would go its way. But 
the spirit of reform did not die out in England, as could be seen at international 
exhibitions when English fnrniture, painted a simple white, appeared next to the 
smnptuous display pieces of the Continent. In France and other Continental 
countries, no forces were yet alive to give industry a direction. 
As Owen Jones, the designer in Henry Cole's group (fig. 203), frankly de­
38 
clared: 'We have no guiding principles.' 
Behind these words appears the shape of things of 1850. There is no doubt 
that the mechanization of adormnent moved in step with the ruling taste of 
the pnhlic. Genre scenes and coyly posed nudes seem as if painted hy the tongue. 
Today every museum has relegated such canvases to its cellar, almost as if they 
outraged decency. Yet they dominated the market and the cnstomers' taste 
from 1850 to 1890, crowding out all other works. They show the same sickly 
and debased sense of material as do the punched ornaments or flowery carpets 
of the art industry. 
THE SEARCH FOR BASIC PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN 
What counter-proposals did Henry Cole's circle have to offer? The attitudes 
of the reformers were shaped in the late Homantic background of their youth. 
They had always believed that contact with good examples was in itself edifying. 
When Felix Summerly (Henry Cole) published a series of children's hooks in 
the 'forties, he illustrated them with woodcuts from Diirer and Holbein. 
These men are contemporaries of Vietor Hugo. Like Delacroix, Owen Jones 
went on tour to the East in the 1830's, where he greatly admired Arabian forms 
and ornament. A few years prior to the Great Exhibition, he published a lavish 
39 
book on the Alhamhra.
England's artists around 1850 were competent craftsmen. They trod an 
honorable middle path. Their art could yield no deeper impulses. Yet, the 
36 
William 'Vhewell, Lectures on the Result of the Exhibition, London, 1852. 
37 
The unexpectedly large earnings of the Exhibition were used to purchase objects from which Henry 
Cole gradually assembled the first museum of decorative art, The Victoria and Albert Museum, South 
Kensington. After this, with the help of his fellow workers he realized his plans for a School of Design. 
38 
Owen Jones (1853), quoted in Gray, op.cit. 
39 
Jones, Elevations and Sections of the Alhambra, London, Hl47-8. 
353 