the Empire and, as much as anything in Napoleon's time, forms a premonition 
of things to come. 
Here the upholsterer, the decorator, announces his claim to leadership. Within 
a strong architectonic framework, hangings with various valances and side­
pieces were introduced under Louis XIV. Jean Marot helped to give them a 
clear shape, such as might merge with the architectural space. Under the Direc­
toire began the replacing of panels by drapery painted on the wall in allusion 
to Antiquity, as in Madame Hec.amier's bedroom. This, together with the treat­
ment of furniture as self-sufficient architecture, did much to further spatial dis­
integration. Napoleon seems at first to have resisted the fashion. Back from 
his campaigns, he deprecated the hall at Mahnaison, which Percier and Fontaine 
12 
had draped in tent shape: it 'resembled a cage for wild beasts.' After drapery 
painted on the wall, real fabric soon wrapped space in its garments, muflling 
all boundaries. 
Drapery is elected to play a quite special role. The Directoire attempted to 
give calico curtains a somewhat informal air hy hanging them from large rings, 
loosely held on a rod. Agitated movement takes hold of the curtains under the 
Empire; 'What has left us a particularly forceful memory of this period is the 
13 
mode of execution of this drapery, so dense, and so daring in its effect.' 
This is what made the greatest impression on an upholsterer of the 'seventies. 
The upper part of the curtain (lambrequin) is picturesquely draped, and slung, 
toga-like, over the curtain rod, to which motion is also communicated. Eagle 
heads hold the lambrequins in their great open heak.s (fig. 196). Fringes, double 
or threefold, give additional weight. The calico curtains, asymmetrically crossing, 
are gathered in generous folds. In the same way, windows, doors, and alcoves 
are abandoned to the upholsterer's fancy. 
This florid drapery was of well calculated carelessness. Skilled workers 
knew how to cut and sew these difficult pieces, and to cast them with casual 
effect over their curtain rods -- the spear or the thyrsos staff. The draperies 
are still made of light calico. Under Louis Philippe the picturesque grouping 
of the Empire will be combined with heavy, Louis XIV fabrics. 
12 
G. Rayssal, Chateau de Malma£son, Iexie historique el descriptiJ, Paris, 1908? p.l3. 
13 Deville, Dicti'onnaire du lapissi'er, Paris, 1378, p.l97. 
343 