In many highly mechanized countries, leaven has been altogether supplanted 
by yeast, First brewer's yeast was used, Opinions vary about when this began, 
Some say that yeast did not come into general use until the middle of the nine­
teenth century," while others point out that brewer's yeast was used in Paris 
38 
bakeries as early as the seventeenth, Yeast dough, like leaven dough, is left 
to rise overnight, During this time it slowly rises as a result of the gas formed 
by fermentation, and a natural warmth develops. 
On the Continent, special high-fermenting types of yeast were later developed 
and sold in compressed form. These ultimately led to the modern hakery yeast, 
which American concerns produce in large quantities. High-fermenting yeast 
reduces the time of fermentation from ten hours to live. 
Prior to the mechanization of baking, the bread's aroma was held in great 
esteem. It comes from the natural bouquet of baked grain, from the volatile 
esters developed in fermentation or during baking, and sometimes from added 
aromatic herbs (caraway seed). These volatile esters, together with carbonic acid 
gas, are slowly produced in the course of fermentation. Chemists have stressed 
that a large and rapid generation of carbonic acid results in a loss of flavor." 
In the 'fifties, bread, in its very substance as a material, was attacked by 
mechanization. For the sake of increased production, carbonic acid, instead of 
the slower-working ferments, was mixecl with the dough. 
From mid-eighteenth century on, chemicals were resorted to in bread manu­
facture in order t.o make the bread weigh more than its flour content would 
allow, or to make it look whiter than was to be expected from the quality of the 
40 
flour: plaster, alum, sulphate of copper-' a liqueur glass of weak copper sul­
41
phate solution for 200 loaves of bread' - or such substitutes as potato or 
bean flour." This tampering gave the illusion of greater quantity or of better 
quality. Punitive measures were taken to reduce or eliminate adulteration. 
In the 1350's, attempts to increase production resorted not only to mechanical 
means, bnt also to the natural sciences. The laws of the expansion and contrac­
tion of gases, which John Dalton and Gay-Lnssac discovered shortly after 1800, 
1 
~ J. C. Drummond and Anne Wilbraham, The Engli.~hman's Food, London, 1939, p-353_ 
ssE. and L. Bunyard, The k'picure's Companion, London, 1937. 
9 
3 Arkady, a collection of articles reprinted from the Arkady Review, :\h.nchester, Enghnd, 1933. 
40 
'Alum was used in the town bakeries as much as four ounces to the sack of flour; this chemical in­
creases the size and at the same time the texture and the colour of a loaf baked from inferior flour.' 
Drummond and Wilbraham, op.cit. p.342. 
4J Schmidt, op.cit. p.l46. 
42 Sylvester Graham writes in his Treatise on Bread and Breadmaking, Boston, H137, that in lB29 25 
bakers were punished for the use of copper sulphate. The first to attack the adulteration of food was 
F. Aooum, Treatise on the Adulteration of Food, London, 1820. His description of 'illicit methods' did 
him no good. He was forced to leave England. 
181 