to its own needs the Roman pattern it had found in Syria. The wise caliphs 
could thus compensate their subjects for the alcoholic joys forbidden hy their 
faith. 
13 
14 
What differentiates the hammam or bath of Islam from the Roman bath? 
The palestra and its gymnastic games, together with the swimming pool in 
the frigidarium, disappear. So do the facilities for intellectual exercise, the 
Greek exedra, or Homan library. As Islam finds its own architectural expression, 
the high-windowed, light-flooded tepidarium gives way to cupolas sparsely 
pierced by the glow of colored bullions, or to stalactite cupolas in the smaller 
rooms. Half light, quiescence, sedusion from the outside world are preferred. 
Iu the cupolas' neardarkness the spirits, djinns, are said to meet. Here the 
active bather of the classical world yields to the passive repose of the oriental. 
A refined technique for loosening, cracking the joints, and a shampoo massage 
with special penetrative power supplant athletic sports. Rest beds enter in the 
place of the Greek cxedra. Musicians play in the galleries of the rest hall. The 
buildings become smaller and less conspicuous. The technical equipment is 
to 
simplified. There is a warm and a cold wing. llypocausts are restricted 
wall flues, and hot-air pipes run under the floor of the warm wing. 
The nucleus of the Roman thermae, a graduated series of hot-air rooms, 
remains. Yet the balance of the whole organism has been modified. 
ln classical times, the apodyterium, or divesting hall, was used for that one 
purpose; the Orient enlarges its functions to those of a combined dressing-room 
and rest hall, the maslak. Tbe bather sojourns in it at the beginning and at 
the conclusion of the regeneration cycle. 
The focus of the Roman bath was the tepidarium, or luke-warm hall. The 
Romans lavished the greatest luxury and the largest share of space upon it. 
Time and again the tepidarium - as in the baths of Caracalla or Diocletian 
(fig. 445h) -tempted nineteenth-century architectural fantasy to essay recon­
structions. The Roman tepidarium seems at least partly explicable on natural 
grounds. The bather entered it when exercise in the palestra had already stim­
ulated his circulation. The tepid atmosphere encouraged the naturally ensuing 
relaxation, and sweating did not need to he artificially provoked. In the hammam 
the tepidarium dwindles to a mere passageway. The decline of the tepidarium 
3
• llammam or 'Dispenser of warmth,' The word derives from the Arabic hamma, to heat, and the 
Hebrew flamam, to be warm, Cf Edmond Pauty, Lcs Ilammams dn Caire, Le Caire, 1933, p,l (lnstitut 
Fran~ais d'Archeologie Orientale dn Caire; MCmmres, voL 64} 
H The various phase& of the Islamie bath, especially its beginnings in Syria, are treated in monographs, 
For Damascus, see Ecochard and LeCceur, op,cit,, indispensable for its predse architectural plates, For 
Constantinople, Heinrich Glueck, Die Biider Konslanlinopds und ihre Slellnng in der Geschichie des 
Morgen und Abendlands, Wien, 1921; Karl Klinghardt, Tiirkische Bader, Stuttgart, 1927, A general survey 
of the bath's development is not available. Without such a work true i0$ight will hardly be possible. 
637 