What took place wa:::; a sort of rf'fiproealiug action, an inducted c.urrenL 
Jndu::;try engendered its wares according to the rule sLated by Hedgrave in 185:); 
'The industrialists cousider pure and perfect l.aslt~ aJJlagonisfic to eommercP, 
02 
and sun1 up their views in the axiom; '·That. is best what. sdls best."' These 
scrap piles of mechanically reproduced hi~torical mementoes acted upon who~ 
ever dwelt among them. The irmate sense for fonn and material decayed; the 
disciplined handling of space perished. 
It mattered little that all this had been known since mid-century, and that 
criticism was exercised to the point of superfluity. The objects proved stronger 
than judgment. 
What emanated from this chaotic setting, what repercussions shook our moral 
constitution cannot he conveyed in ra.Lional terms. No logic, no sociological 
account, can portray the situation. Artistic symbols a;one are adequate. It 
was among the Surrealists' functions to reveal this. They capturetl the sense 
and nonsense of the nineteenth century and showed how this inextrieah1e mixture 
of the banal and the eerie had penetrated our being. 
No one did so more pungently than Max ErnsL Drops of the nineteenth 
century still seemed to flow in his veins. We are thinking of his picture-novels, 
53
and especially La Femme 100 tt:tes - 'The Woman with a Hundred No-Heads.' 
\Vhat can this he but a symbolic nanu_~ for the nineteenth ecntury and. its rest­
less meandcrings? Here irrational images unmnsk ihe devaluation of symbols 
206. Leaf-Shaped 
Candlestick, Elt~ctro­
process. c~l850~ 
(llenry Cole, Journal 
of Design) 
On~ oft~e moRt wacefu} adaptations whidt the" !Jatuntl" school has produced. 
It 1s ~ehcately hght and a beautiful spcciuwn uf the electro-process, shewiug 
how 1t may perfectly realise all tho cffCcts of fine b~cttciJ metal-work, and much 
more cheaply. 
62 
Redg:mve, On the Necessity of Principles in Teaching Design, I.ondon, 1853, p~8~ 
03 
La F'emme 100 tNes, Paris, 1929, and Une Semaine de bonte ou les sept Nkments, Paris, 1931, are per­
haps the most apt to our purpose~ See aLso lHisforfunes of the immortals, New York, 19-12, and Rf!ves d'une 
petilefille qui voulut entrer au Carmel, Paris, 1930~ 
361 