it is seen how new 1naterials and constructions - presLUTiably because we have 
not yet learned to master them- easily lead ID grotesque throwbacks. The 
house, hanging like a merry-go-round on a central pole, tends to circular, polyg­
onal shapes, or the half-pmnpkin shape that Fuller developed in an airplane 
115 
factory around 1945. The idea of resting the house upon a central prop dates 
back well into the nineteenth century and can in some cases have charm and 
meaning."' But as a standard form, multiplied by millions, these self-enclosed 
huts become a city plrumer's nightmare. A similar surrender of human comfort 
is to be noted from the dweller's point of view. Slowly, adaptation of the house 
to the site, of which Frank Lloyd Wright was the foremost exponent, established 
itself beyond challenge. Communication with outer space, through a protected 
zone (porch), is one of the most attractive features of the American house. And 
the decisive factor: freedom to alter the ground plan or add to it is abolished, 
the dweller being imprisoned within the rigid, uniform shell. Why? Becanse 
in the center, within the mast, sits a robot, the mechanical core, tyrannizing 
the whole structure. 
With attention-compelling fanaticism, Buckminster Fuller has devoted dec­
ades to the perfecting of his idea. His insistence that the house of this cen-
. tury, with its mechanical comfort, can be made available to the broad masses, 
by the simultaneous production and assembly of its utilities is certainly in line 
with the inevitable course of things. We have seen how the new architectural 
generation took this problem to heart, and sought ways of reconciling the 
mechanical core with the broader concept of the house. The demand for a 
mechanical core is a token of full mechanization. 
In agriculture, at the same period, the harvesting 'combines' concentrated 
all the phases of the process- from mowing to bagging, from plowing to 
dunging- into a single one. A parallel phenomenon arises in the sphere of 
the dwe!Dng: the nnit that combines kitchen, bath, laundry, beating, climatic 
control, and plumbing in one mechanical nucleus; but here we speak not 
of a 'combine,' but of the mechanical core. In agriculture, after a century of 
mechanization, the problem beemne relatively easy to solve. In the house, 
our mechanical experience begins with the time of full mechanization. A quarter 
of a century is not much in a development. And again, the roots of the problem 
grow into the hmnan sphere. It is too late for us still to be cheated by purely 
engineering solutions won at the expense of human comfort. 
The mechanical core must share in the general direction to be followed hy 
m Architectural Forum, Mar. 1945. 
us In a project for a glass-walled apartment house, Mies van der Rohe (1921) also rested his construc­
tion upon central pillars. 
710 