In Hikli's treatment the air hath was the foundation, the sun hath an intensi­
fication, and the sweat hath the conclusion. Even in his sweat bath he used the 
rays of the sun, the patient wrapping himself in the blankets on which he had 
been lying. Here too, Hikli instinctively decided against linen covers long before 
it was known that the sun's infra-red rays pass more readily through loose­
woven materials. If the sun fails to shine, one is to sweat in a bed steam bath, 
which, as we have seen, was a widely used type in the nineteenth century. 
Some Swiss establishments, carrying on Hikli's tradition, offered sweat baths in 
the winter sun as well. This takes place in a sun lounge, a solarium having a 
southern wall of glass (1912), somewhat like the winter solarium (fig. 442) of the 
Forum thermae in Ostia. The winter sunlight and its intense refraction from 
the snow penetrate the transparent wall, warn1ing the bathers within, who lie 
wrapped in their porous woolen blankets. 
The skeptic must perhaps discover from experience how rapidly perspiration 
sets in even under the oblique wiuter rays, and how much greater is the psycho­
logical tonic of looking out upon snow and blue sky, rather than sitting impris­
oned within an electric sweat box. 
Contemporaries of Arnold Hikli's, such as Browns and Blunt (1377), pointed 
out the germ-killing power of sunlight. We are in the time of Pasteur's dis­
coveries. There were also occasional advocates of sunlight for curative purposes 
earlier, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries." But they had little to do 
with the subtle appraisal of the body as a whole. Rikli tried his idea out on 
himself, when still a hoy. Not without opposition, he progressively laid off 
his clothing until he dared to stroll naked through the woods in his native canton 
74 
of Berne. Like Priessnitz and Urquhart, he was an outsider to medicine. He 
drew his direct inspiration from the prolific hydropathic literature of the mid­
century and, as he himself points out, from the Renaissance advocate of moder­
ate living, the Venetian Luigi Cornaro (1467-1566). 
Of the hath types aiming at total regeneration that sought a place in the 
century, Rikli's air bath and sun bath came last: the cubicle vapor bath around 
1825, the Turkish bath around 1355, and the sun hath around 1370. 
Arnold Rikli's contribution was to have concentrated the effects of air and 
sun into an 'atmospheric bath.' He showed how sunlight - that intangible 
and dangerous medium- might he used with safety. In a time of light-exclud­
ing interiors and of flight from the sun, he could not hope for a popular following. 
73 
Scott, Story of Baths and Bathing, London, 1939. 
74 
He was of the class of small Swiss industrialists- his father bad owned a dyeing~ plant before him 
- who emigrated around the mid~century to sparsely industrialized regions, such as Italy or Austria. 
Rikli's 300~worker factory in outlying Carniola was quite successful, but be left it to his brothers, to found 
his sanatorium at Veldes castle. 
673 