This satisfied comment upon the structural change of the famJCr intD a business­
man also has its dark side. :Farm produce lies at the mercy of the fluctuating 
77 
stock exchange. Agricultural prices were first to sulfer in the downward trend.
Farm income fluctuates in mad curves. Economic uncertainty no longer stems 
from failure of the harvest, but from overproduction. 
The position of the independent farmer is severely menaced in the great pro­
duction areas of the Midwest. When the fam1ers were unable tD meet their 
dehts in the trying days of the early 'twenties, the banks formed 'Farm Manage­
ment Companies' which sent in hard-hailed managers from elsewhere to cultivate 
the ruined farmers' land. One of these companies expanded its holdings from 
seven hundred acres to a quarter-million acres in a few years. A process- now 
magnified to gigantic dimensions and without creative impulse -· recalls the 
enclosure of the common lands hy feudal owners in the eighteenth century. 
Here, as earlier, unemployment followed and uprooted populations. 
More than erosion and dust storms, the tractor and combines were blamed 
for the uprooting of farm families. John Steinbeck pictures the process in close­
ups in his Grapes of Wrath, when the tractor has to clear the fields and run down 
the houses of the now superfluous tenants. 
'And that reminds me,' says the man on the tractor, 'you better get out soon. 
I'm going through the dooryard after dinner.' 
'But if we go where'll we go? How'll we go? We got no money.' This is the 
question that the tenants ask of the owners. But they in turn know only that 
the land must he handed over to the hank. 
From these dispossessed farmers and tenants came the 'Okies,' migrant farm 
workers traveling from one state to another, from strawberry to grapefruit, 
from peaches to oranges or e,otton: nomads in their own land. 
The Human Implications 
As we said in opening, the structural change precipitated by mechanization 
is nowhere more conspicuous than in the sphere of agriculture. The conse­
quences, however, are harder 1D survey. The figure of the wanderer in his own 
land, the migrant farm worker, may be abolished. The Second World War 
proved this. Yet the phenomenon remains. The farmer has been drawn into 
flux. He has heen altered in his relation to the soil. The relationship has become 
neutralized. Mechanization hastened the process. There can he no doubt of 
77 'Agricultural prices were the first to break in 1920 . .. _ The blow struck the farmers at about the 
same time the grain crop of the United StatE>~<> was coming on the market. . . . In contrast there was no 
noticeable drop in non-agricultural products until near the end of the year.' Chester C. Davis, 'The 
Development of Agricultural Policy since the World War,' in Yearbook of Agriculture, 1941, pp.298-9. 
167 