51. ~'RANK B. G!UlRETH' Cyclo­
graph of an Expert Surgeon Tying a 
Knot. 1914. Carrying further the line 
of Marcy's experiments, alllwugh he may 
not have been acquainted with them, 
Gilbreth was thefwst to give a repre:senia­
tion of movement in space !hal could be 
precisely rnea.sured. He made this photo­
graph while in Germany in 1914. 'The 
path of the "wlion is shown, but not tM 
speed or direction. The record does slww 
the beautiful smooth repetitive pattern of 
the expert.' (QuofnHon and photo by 
courte.w of Lillian M. Gilbreth) 
Frank B. Gilbreth succeeded in extending and refining the study of time and 
motion. 'Time study,' be says in his popular Prim£r of Scientific Managem£nt, 
'is the art of recording, analyzing, synthesizing the time of the elements of any 
49 
operation.' 
Stop-watch methods were not precise enough for Frederick Taylor's successors. 
The stop watch is mute and can say nothing ahout how a motion is performed. 
The hmnan eye is untrustworthy; reaction time varies with the observer. The 
form of the movement remains invisible and cannot be investigated. Gilbreth's 
problem was to portray its elements, to delineate its path. 
In his earlier research the goal is not yet clear. His study of ferro-concrete 
building (1903) lays down some four hundred rules, a sort of military dispatch 
system as preferred by Frederick Taylor. New conceptions already announce 
themselves in his large square book, Concrete System. It is saturated with 
pictures illustrating the different phases: 'ahnost a stenographic report of what 
50 
a succ-essful contractor said to his workmen.' But in his Bricklaying System 
of the following year, he clearly states what he wishes to inaugurate- an era 
of motion study. 'The motion study in this book,' he declares, 'is but the begin­
51 
ning of a motion study era.' 
The Precise Recording of Movement, c.I912 
It is not surprising that Gilbreth made nse of the motion-picture camera as 
soon as it appeared in France. For further insight into the process of movement, 
49 
F. B. Gilhreth, Primer of Scientific Management, New York, 1914, p.7. 
50 
Gilbreth, CQnCI'eie System, New York, 1908. 
61 
Gilbreth, Bricklaying System, New York, 1909, p.l40. 
102 