Archaeologists now tend to agree that the oldest medieval folding chair, the 
gilded hronze armchair of the Merovingian King Dagohert, is of antique origin 
29 
and formed part of the Merovingian treasure. Folding chairs of metal (iron 
rods) are found in the Renaissance. 
The fifteenth-century craftsman shows himself astonishingly adept at bring­
ing mobility to writing and reading desks. From the first, medieval writing 
desks had sloping tops. They are hettcr suited to the position of the head in 
reading or writing than are our horizontal-topped writing desks, whose whole 
construction follows English library tahles of the late eighteenth century, roomy 
enough for the great folios of engravings then in fashion. 
Medieval desks were small in size, just wide enough to hold an open book. 
30 
People rested them on their knees, on a table, or mounted them on stands. 
The desk tops gradually broaden in the late fifteenth century, and are endowed 
with a new mobility. The painting or writing desk developed in the cells of 
monks who used them diagonally. The swing desk (fig. 152) is asymmetrically 
mounted on a metal crank pivoting in a socket. Thus it can be moved at will. 
Also produced were various combinations-" book rest, desk, and locker all in 
one. 
The secular scholars of the late fifteenth century were no less interested in 
convenient instruments for study. We are in the age of Humauism, with its 
growing interest in the Bible, the ancient authors, and comparison of texts. 
Hence, revolving reading desks were developed, with polygonal or conic planes. 
2
P Emile Molinier, Les .l'.Ieubles du Moyen Age el de la Renaissance, Paris, 1897, p.4. 
3° The Middle Ages did not pedantically follow these rules. Boccaccio in the Munich miniature of 
1.458 is writing on a primitive bench (fig. 151), and Jerome in Carpaccio's painting of 1505 writes on a 
narrow table (fig. 158). Yet the strongly inclined plane is the rule. In Holbein's schoolmaster's sign 
(fig. 113) the steepness of the desk is more striking because it surmounts a massive body. 
153a. Movability in Gothic Furniture: C':<Othic Swing­
Back Bench, Detail ofWerl Altar. 1438. A remote fore­
runner of the American railway sea.l (flfl. 271), where the 
swing back allows the passenger to face forward at all 
limes. (Prado, Madrid; photo courtesy Fogg Museum) 
___,.._ 
153b. Gothic Swing-Back Bench, St. Barbara Panel 
ofWerl Altar, MasterofFiemnlle. 1438. &int Barbara 
i'l sealed near the fu-eplace on a Gothic swing-back bench. 
The wooden bar serves as a backrest and is mobile, so that 
284 
the user may turn her back fo the fire or face it as she 
pleases. (Prado, Madrid; plwlo C(mrtesy Fogg Museum) 