put on the ntarket a neat and ver-y con1fortable settee for country piazzas, which 
97 
shall be as casv as the hammock to lie on ... ' 
. . 
The airy wire mattress soon became a favorite. In 'Art. and Home,' one o{ 
the handy popular series of the time, which directed the English public toward 
sensibly hygienic furnishing, one reads (1878): 'l would recommend a new sort 
of clastic mattress; it resembles a eoat of rnail and possesses the triple merit 
98 
in these travelling days, of being cool, clean and portable.' Lady Barker 
recommends the wire mattress for low iron cribs for children (fig. 229). 
What Happen,~ to Man's Surroundings in the J'Vineteenth Century? 
The history of nineteenth-century ruling taste, with the sociological and 
emotive documentation it would need, is still waiting to be written. Here we 
have merely drawn out fragments indicating the power of mechanization over 
man. 
For the mechanization of adornment we have confined ourselves to England. 
Here, around 1850, mechanization was running ahead of other countries. Here, 
the first dangerous symptoms appeared. Here, the first warners and reformers 
were heard. Which is not to say that France played a minor part. From the 
time of Colbert, who fostered the luxury industries and brought them to the 
fore in the seventeenth century, France had been the arbiter of fashion. And 
she performed brilliantly, from the standpoint of ruling taste, at the great inter­
national exhibitions of the nineteenth century. The exhibition catalogues and 
those of the large Parisian firms, mass producers of statues and balustrades, 
fancy railing and docks of gilded zinc, are conclusive enough. In 1867 the jury 
99 
of the Parisian International Exhibition computed at 150,000 the number 
of gilded zinc clocks that French industry had delivered throughout the world. 
The specially commissioned mllery of Christoffie metal for Napoleon III 
ami the hand-chased, silver gondola that the Empress Eugenic presented to 
Fernand de Lesseps when opening the Suez Canal have as definitely lapsed into 
insignificance as the names of the artisans who designed them. But the anony­
mous products of mass fabrication are of leading interest in this period, because 
of their influence on the emotional formation of the masses. The multiplication 
and development of this mechanized adornment is by no means explored. 
For furniture, we confined ourselves to a few examples from France. More 
plastically than the English, the French developmenL shows what inroads the 
nineteenth century made inLo the organism of furniture. Side by side with 
97 
The Manufacturer and Bnilder, May 1871. 
08 
Lady Barker, The Bedroom and Boudoir, in Art and Home .Series, London, 1878. 
9
~ Cf. Henri Clouzot, Des Tuileries a St. Ckm.d, Paris, 1925, p.l04, 
385 