is used in general life away from the machine .shop, has to have its parts abso­
68 
lutely interchangeable, so that it can he repair.ed by non-skilled men.' 
He follows Taylor's method, unusual for the time, of so far as possible reducing 
working hours and raising wages. Here too the foreman retains his function. 
But when Taylor, in his famous experiments on shoveling, tells his laborers in 
the yard of the Bethlehem Steel Company: 'Pete and Mike, you fellows under­
stand your job all right, both of you fellows are first claS8 men, but we want to 
69 
pay you double wages,' he still is set upon raising production within the fac­
tory. Henry Ford goes further, and regards low wages as 'the cutting of buying 
70 
power and the curtaihnent of the borne market.' Indeed Henry Ford views 
production and sales as a unit an:!, long before the high-pressure salesmanship 
of the 1930's, builds a world-wide organization to distribute his products. The 
efficiency of the sales force is as precisely worked out as the tempo of the assembly 
line. 
A further broadening of the circle might take up the question: How has the 
automobile affected living habits? In what measure has it stimulated and in 
what measure has it destroyed? How far, then, is its production to he encouraged 
and to what extent curbed? 
As a phenomenon, Henry Ford crystallizes anew the independent pioneering 
spirit of 1830 and 1860. In a period of elaborate banking and credit institutions, 
a period governed by the stock exchange, wben the lawyers are needed at. every 
move, Henry Ford trusts none of them and operates without banks. 
In an age when anonymous corporations grow to giant proportions, he would 
exercise patriarchal power over his worker force, like a master over his journey­
men. He would be independent of everyone in everything. He gathers in his 
own hands forests, iron and coal mines, smelting fornaces, rubber plantations, 
and other raw materials. 
But just as great. cities become increasingly ungovernable when they over­
grow themselves, !,'Teat. industrial concentrations elude the patriarchal hand when 
they develop to the gigantic. 
like Oliver Evans, furthering ideas ungrasped 
Ford did not have to spend his life, 
by his contemporaries. He may have had the same indomitable energy; but 
he also had the advantage of coming not at the start but at the end of the mecha­
nistic phase. Success does not depend on genius or energy alone, but on the extent 
to wbich one's contemporaries bave been prepared by what has gone before. 
Tbe assembly line too, as conceived by Henry Ford, forms in many ways the 
fruition of a long development. 
sa Henry Ford, Moving Forward, New York, 1930, p.l28. 
70 
69 
Copley, op.cit. vol. 2, p.58. Henry Ford, My Life and Work, chapter on wages. 
117 