Mobility 
Just as exploring the mobile and exploiting its practical uses form one of the 
basic trends of our period, so in furniture the key word was mobility. 
The nomadic furniture of the Middle Ages that could follow its owner wher­
ever he journeyed was primitive. Demountable, collapsible pieces were cus­
tomary before stable ones. The table consisted of loose planks set on trestles, 
and was placed to the wall after meals. The table with four legs and a fixed 
frame comes in later, contemporaneously with the Renaissance chair, having 
arm and hack rests. The faldstool, an inheritance of Antiquity, was standard 
long before the four-legged framed chair. Desks were movable and well differ­
entiated according to purpose- writing or reading. 
The demand for mobility, although weakened by the advent of more stable 
conditions, never became quite extinct. In the stable household of the late 
fifteenth to the late eighteenth centuries, quite other values matured, tending 
toward form and convenience. 
Already the late eighteenth century, an age that had begun to invent not 
only cunning automata but spinning machines, delighted in ingenious, mechan­
ically contrived comfort; and this less in the concealed secret drawers than in 
small, compact furniture devised for new ends and often serving multiple pur­
poses. In England, and especially in France, the mid-eighteenth century pro­
duced 'portable beds' or 'traveling beds' that with a few motions would pack 
away into a bag. America as well as England has preserved beds that could be 
converted into reclining chairs. 
The nineteenth century turned mobility into a specific channel. Life was 
more stable, while living quarters were often cramped, particularly in America. 
Thi' frequently led to highly inventive types and combinations, sometimes fring­
ing on the grotesque. lt produced much that was new: the sleeping car, for 
instance, based on the principle of convertibility. 
The new tasks, demanding ncar-absolute solutions, are those in which mobility 
is made to serve our physiological requirements. A mode of sitting develops 
that aims at complete bodily relaxation. As we shall see, it is often achieved 
through conscious interplay of the body with the mechanism of the chair. Lying 
too, and the many positions between sitting and lying- arm support, relaxa­
tion of the head - are met in a wide variety of constructional solutions. 
Posture Physiologically Considered 
The architectural movement around 1920 sought artistic forms to express our 
physiological requirements: for sitting, a hovering posture; for lying, a posture 
398 