and forth over enormous hread hoards. This Renaissance idea was used in the 
Vatican kitchens, although here the dough was worked by boards instead of 
rollers. Certain characteristics, which became more and more pronounced in 
the latest stages of mechanized bread making, ean already be observed in the 
product of this simple Spanish machine; the bread was 'whiter than that kneaded 
4 
hy hand; its ernst is not crisp but extremely delieate and not too elastic.' 
Late in the eighteenth century, Italy, the land of floury foods, began to employ 
kneading machines on a larger scale. By 1789 kneading machines were operat­
5 
ing in the municipal bakeries of Genoa. Here already a rotary mechanism was 
used. A tread wheel, such as we shall find in the first mechanical bakery in 
Paris toward the middle of the nineteenth century, drove vertical hars placed 
at intervals in the tub. This procedure, it was stressed, could provide a 'pain 
6 
Ieger et delicat.' The bread of the mlmicipal bakeries of Genoa was the only 
one sold on the market. And even today large-scale bread manufacture in 
Europe has been adopted mainly hy co-operatives. 
In 1796 a Paris baker, J. B. Lembert, began work on a kneading machine, 
which he did not make puhlic until 1810 when the Societe d'Encouragement pour 
l'Indnstrie Nationale offered a prize of 1500 francs for the machine that could 
produce 'the most perfect dough.' Lemhert employed the principle of the churn. 
A great cylinder, with tight-fitting covers, revolved seven or eight times a minute 
armmd a horizonial axle; in ahout half an hour, the dough seems to have been 
7 
adequately mixed (fig. 91).
J. B. Lemhert's machine is often regarMA as the beginning of mechanical 
kneading, and, though his principle was not retained, it does seem to have 
yielded the best results at first. Several deeades later, a model successfully 
applying Lembert's idea of a trough revolving on an axle is mentioned as the best 
kneading machine.' Lemhert had few competitors. Not until the end of the 
1820's, as France slowly ripened for industrialization, did anyone attempt to 
mechanize baking ovens and mixers. In 1829 five French patents for kneaders 
were registered. From then on, ahnost every year saw new proposals and combi­
nations to replace the various kneading motions - pushing, pulling, and striking 
- hy mechanical operations. Sometimes this was done by means of iron arms 
rotating in a closed cylinder, sometimes by an Archimedean screw or by inter­
locking cones, which slowly drive the dough from the circnurference to the 
4Benoit, Fontenelle, and Malpeyre, Norweau .Manuel du boulanger, Paris, 1778, vol. 2, p.47. 
& Ibid. vol. 2, p.48. 
6 Ibid. 
7 Ibid. vol. 2, p.47. 
s Fontaine's kneading machine, cf. C. H. Schmidt, Das Deutsche Biickerhandwerk in Jalrre 1847, 
Weimar, 1847, p.234. 
170 