business. Chicago"s rise. it has justly heen pointed out. was not a result of the 
40 
Civil War, as is so often said, but of inherent forces. 
This first upswing was followed hy a second phase early in the 'seventies. It 
was then that original minds fought their way into the packing industry, intro­
ducing new things, suited to a hig business era: the introduction of refrigerating 
machines in the storage rooms and strenuous efforts to mechanize the slaughter­
ing process. Of the packers, it was George M. Hammond who, as we have seen, 
employed the refrigerator car to hring meat to Boston at the end of the 'sixties. 
J. A. Wilson, another packer, introduced a new article of food, having 'dis­
covered and tested a method hy which meat~ could he preserved in compact 
and solid form ... the meat would come forth in a solid cake, without a particle 
of gravy, in a natural and palatable condition ... cooked, ready to he sliced 
and eaten.' This, of r,ourse, was corned beef, a name now passed into many 
languages and an article found in the canteen of every soldier. Wilson devised 
a suitable can, shaped like a truncated pyramid (figs. 113, 114), which bas heen 
kept almost without change to the present day. As we read in Frank Leslie's 
Illustrated Newspaper in 1378, the 'meat is compressed in cans clear of all hones 
41 
or gristle,' a weight saving of 3 : 1 over meat packed in barrels; that is, ahout 
the same economy as in tbe transportation of fresh meat instead of livestock. 
The entry into competition of Armour and Swift marks the third phase: the 
conquest of the national and, in a sense, of the world market. This phase brought 
a further elaboration of the machinery and the perfecting of the assembly line 
as still used today: The refrigerator car became the offensive weapon in this 
expansion. Swift and Armour's ascent certainly stems from an irrepressihle entre­
preneurial drive; yet two advantages were theirs: They came at a time ready 
for men of giant projects; and they could profit from the intensive experience 
which the industry had gathered at this place. Actually neither of them intro­
duced new inventions at first. Nevertheless their figures stand out more vigor­
ously than any others, for hoth center around the very crux of the packing 
industry: organization. Through organization they attained a scale once incon­
ceivable in livestock processing. 
In the packing industry, for reasons ahout which we shall have more to say, 
invention plays no great role. Wbat invention could do here to mechanize the 
handicraft process cannot be compared witb what it did in developing precision 
machinery for spinning. The millowner's problems arc almost ended when the 
thread has heen spun. The packer's problems hegin when it comes to distribut~ 
ing his perishable product and bringing it to the consumer. 
40
Helen S-wift, My Falher and My Molher, Chicago, 1937, p.l27. 
~l Frank Leslie's Illustrated Newspaper, 12 Oct, 1878, p.95. 
224 