I 
~ 
E 
Grohnm's Gas Rangt, Glasgow, 1861. 
361. Gas Range, Glasgow, 1851. Gas appliances for healing purposeR were paJenledfrom the early nineteenth 
century. But the 1:ntroduction of gas as a cooking fuel was nery slow. This gas range with spiral burners and 
plain cast~iron lop is in ihe direction of the later standard. Hotels were almost the only users of gas for cooking. 
362. Gas Range, 1889. Toward 1880 'the popular prejudice is gradually giving way.' This type with fh£ 
broiler at the base was developed in England from the start (ftg. 361) and was -adopted by American production 
in the 'eighties. Later the coal range with broiler above (fig. 353) was imitated by the gas range as well as the 
early eleclrical range (fl(l. 367). (George M. Clark and Co., Chicago. Jewel Gas Stove Catalogue in collectWn 
of Edison Inslilule, Dearborn, Mich.) 
The white areas of porcelain enamel, which were later to mver the range and 
radically change the aspect of the kitchen, were in use by 1910, although 
50 
confined at that period to the range top and splashback.
From the flat-topped English type with its stacking snrfaces, where oven 
and often a hroiler occupy the base, the Americans after 1930 developed their 
'tahle-top range.' Now the black top has hemme a working snrface of white 
enamel, cut only hy the burner openings to the left. Under the name of 'com­
51 
pact table-top range (fig. 363) -although they have no trne working or 
on Catalogue of the Reliable Stove Company, Division of the American Stove Company, Cleveland, 
Ohio: 'Reliable Gas Stoves and Ranges,' 1914; copy in the New York Public Library. Cf. p.IO: 'Some 
years ago we introduced the beautiful ... porcelain enameled idea which has proven a decided success • 
• . . We are now operating one of the most complete enameling plants.' 
51 Catalogue of the Standard Gas Equipment Corporation, 18 East 41st Street, New York, N.Y.: 
'Gas Ranges for Apartments, Residences and Housing Developments,' p.9; copy in New York Public 
Library. 
540 