plywood industries stimulated young American architecl5 to a clearing of the 
way, we shall presently see. 
The Kitchen in the Servantless Household 
One problem could no longer he overlooked toward the end of the 'thirties, a 
problem that had passed down from decade to decade without solution: the 
servantless household. Now it was felt even hy those who were heretofore 
accustomed to have servants in the house. The trend runs deeply within our 
time. Although not confined to America, it appears more clearly in the United 
States, where it had always heen latent. 
We have seen how, in 1841, Catherine Beecher faced the contradiction exist­
ing hetwe.cn the institution of 'domestic servant'' and a democratic society. 
Her plan of the small kitchen in a town house (1869) (fig. 337) is actually an 
outline of the servantless household. Four decade.s later the advocates of the 
clem-ly stated the problem and qnite precisely pointed out 
'new housekeeping' 
the course of things. 
Christine Frederick voices this awareness in 1912: 
I feel that when the present mistress-slave relation is changed to busine-..ss-like one of 
employer-employee with schedule hours and extra pay for extra work done, the service 
will be put, as it should be, on the same plane as in other employments. . . . A girl in this 
class is isolated from her companionship, looked down on by them as inferior to typists 
and clerks. . . . I believe that we are practically coming to the aholishment of a perma-
nent serving class. . . . I can see no practical reasons why we shall not have servants .. . 
who work for us . .. who come to us daily ... as workers go to office and factory . ... I 
191 
believe we will come to it in all our homes.
Three decades later, during the Second World War, the matter could no longer 
he put off. Now periodicals like the Reader's Digest bombard their millions of 
readers with headings such as 'Household Servants Have Gone Forever,' soh­
title 'Your maid- after the war- if you get one will have the social or economic 
status of an office or factory worker.''" 
The new situation of the family is not of merely sociological interest. It 
affects the house to its very eore. What will hecome of the kitchen in the serv­
antless household? 
That important space-and-step saver, the I-, L- or U-shaped kitchen, is 
compact and self-contained, like the compact hathroorn, which developed two 
191 Ladies Home Journal (Philadelphia), Dec. 1912, p.l6. 
m Reader's Digest, Apr. 1945, article condensed from the American Magazine. 
620 