44 
cradle found in America c.l830; the office chair of the 1850's- all are descend­
ants of the late Gothic cradle. 
The Hinge 
Hinges are met with here and there, used in varions ways, before the four­
teenth centnry. The miserere seats of the choir stall turn up like the 'opera 
seats' that appeared in France around 1850. Choir stalls are actually seats of 
honor arrayed side by side for a privileged class, the clergy, in a privileged place, 
the choir. Their seats turn upon pin hinges so that the monk or ecclesiastic 
may kneel in performance of the holy office. 
Furniture was designed to leave the room as unencumbered as possible. Car­
paccio's St. Jerome (1505) writes at a table that will fold to lbe wall like an 
ironing board. It is but a step from this collapsible piece to the drop-leaf table, 
which has, besides the fixed top, movable sections that swing downwards. From 
the sixteenth centnry, we possess pieces already fashioned in rustic roughness, 
45 
such as the drop-leaf table in the Folkwang Museum, Hagen (fig. 163), whose 
hinged side leaves are sustained on pivoting supports. 
The eighteenth century favored drop-leaf tables as it did the revolving chair. 
It further elaborated them (gate-leg table) and built them in ever-increasing 
sizes. But the late eighteenth century was especially drawn to more efficient 
methods of construction. 
In America, as perhaps in Europe, rooms were divided by mobile wooden 
partitions hinged to the ceiling. The trae,c of these lowcrable screens has heen 
lost in Europe, but we may discover them in Connecticut, where stone honses 
of the frrst half of the seventeenth century bad plank screens that were raised 
to the ceiling in sunnner and let down in winter to concentrate the wam1th 
around the fireplace. 
The Demountable Table 
Medieval ways live on in our bahits of speech. We 'turn the tables,' 'set the 
table,' 'clear the hall,' 'turn the table up.' To the Middle Ages, large tables 
standing permanently in the room were a thing unknown. Poems and inventories 
46 
alike speak not of the table pure and simple, hut of the board and trestle. This 
usage persisted for a time even in the sixteenth century, when the four-legged 
frame tahle was still spoken of as a 'hoard and frame.' The nsual Gothic table, 
44 Illustrated (fig. 4) in Esther Frazer, 'Painted Furniture in America,' part m, 1835-45, Antiques, 
New York, vol. vn, 1925. 
411 A. G. Meyer, Geschichle der Moebelfornum, Leipzig, 1902-ll, Serie IV, Tafel2. 
4tl Havard, op.cit., vol. IV, col. 1134-5. 
291 