MECHANIZATION AND THE SOIL: AGRICULTURE 
The Farmer in Structural Change 
THE structural changes which mechanization has brought ahout are nowhere 
easier to follow than in the agricultural sphere, hut ouly so far as the machines 
are concerned. It is otherwise with mechanization's impact upon the structure 
of the farmer. This may hold implications for society transcending the purely 
economic. 
We survey too short a span and our experience is still too brief for the voieing 
of assured judgment. A hare century of agricultural mechanization lies behind 
us. Our experience is limited to capitalistic conditions. What mechanization 
bas wrought upon the farmer in the Kolkhoz is even harder to judge with finality. 
In the industrial domain, we can more approximately see what the change 
from handicrafts to mechanization bas meant. In the agricultural domain, ques­
tions arise that still lack any answer. Man's relation with the soil is involved; 
not in the sense of ownership, for the structural change is manifest in the United 
States and the Soviet Union alike. The farmer, symbol of continuity, has been 
drawn into flux. 
Within society the tiller of the soil is a link, a bond of union between man 
and the vitality of nature. The craftsman and the industrial worker shape 
artifacts- clothing, mechanisms, houses. The farmer tends organic growth: 
animal, plant, and soil. 
Thus the tiller of the soil is understood as the constant element within a civi­
lization. This bas not changed sinoe Homer's contemporary Hesiod praised the 
farmer's calling as one blessed above all others, overranking the trader's and 
even the warrior's. The attitude is re-echoed with striking consistency and the 
more so in highly civilized periods, as tmder Rome of the Empire or during the 
eighteenth century. It little matters that in contrast to court and urban life 
the tiller of the soil becomes simplified in the imagination of moralists and poets. 
The farmer does not shine in a civilization. But he is as the stabilizing lead 
stowed deep within the keel. Cities form the content of a culture, the cargo. It 
is the function of the fanner invisibly to resist the cross winds of destiny. When 
130 