59 
flour ever produced,' as an anonymous contemporary pamphlet points out. 
This cleausing process was devised before the rollers were tried out in America 
in 1873; hut from then on, the tempo as well as the size of the mills increased 
enormously. Arom1d 1881 all the large Minneapolis mills were adapted to the 
new process and extensively auton1atized. 
Hand in hand came large-scale production and increasing concentration of 
ownership. It was the period in which the Chicago packing houses moved 
toward monopoly. 
No radical change had taken place in the century from Oliver Evans' 'new 
60 
process of flour making by automatic machinery' to lhe 'new process of mid­
dling flour.' Likewise no basic improvement in milling machinery occurred 
after 1890. Instead there were technical changes in the direction of novelty. 
Interest centered around obtaining still finer and whiter flour. Efforts bore on 
elaborate, ever more complicated apparatus for the artificial bleaching of flour. 
The puhlic- the millers maintained-- demanded a flour of greater whiteness 
61 
than muld he ohtained hy anything hut artificial bleaching. This may have 
been the case. But the decisive reason lay elsewhere. It had formerly been 
considered necessary to age the flour for a period of months. During this time 
it lost its natural creamy color and became pure white. But the time factor 
involved in this aging process was onerous to large-scale production. It meant 
large warehouses and capital outlays lying idle. 'Millers sought for a way to 
escape the burden,' specialists inform us. 'The remedy they found was the 
62 
artiJicial bleaching and aging of flour.' This was done by high-voltage currents 
or infiltration with gases (chlorine). Commercial bleaching was first introduced 
in France around the turn of the century, then successfully carried out in Eng­
63 
land, finally finding its large-scale application in Aruerica. The cabinet in 
which the bleaching takes place within a matter of minutes is no hulkier than 
a small chest of drawers. Blown in through tubes, the chlorine gas iustantane­
ously penetrates the whirling particles; and the flour drops another storey down­
wards straight into its paper sack. 
Artificial bleaching was not accepted without debate. There were long and 
hitter rontroversies and investigations. The experts often took di.ametrically 
opposite stands. It is not for us to judge whether they are right who maintain 
59 
The original inventor for the purifying of middlings, New York, 1874, p.'t This pamphlet is one of 
the numerous works about the inventor of the new process. 
6
° From Oliver Evans' specification. 
61 Kuhlmann, op.cit. p.283. 
62Jbid. p.234. 
63 
Commercial bleaching apparently dates from a French patent, 1898. Cf. C. H. Baily, The Chemistry 
of Wheat Fwu:r, New Yod<, 1925. 
189 