oricn tal concrption may he considered the more organie, for lhc posture it 
evolved is independent of all outside agenc)'. Western culture, we noted earlier, 
has from the fifteenth century moved toward an increasingly differentiated 
posture. The West sits with downward hanging feet. The most advanced 
taken when the last century engineered interplay 
step along this direction was 
between the mechanism and the body, a state of hovering cquilibrimn. 
Some rna)' condemn this mechanical intervention. Mechanized furniture 
rna)' he rejected together with the mechanized household. For both answer 
to the same mode of living. Perhaps the direction followed h)' the furniture 
of the engineer will prove more interesting than the mechanization of the house­
hold in one respect. Constituent furniture frequcnt.l)' tackle,, the problem of 
relaxation, and not- as in the vacumn cleaner or the automatic washing 
machine - that of labor-saving alone. 
Patent Furniture and the 1920's 
The architects around 1920 were becoming ever more aware of the inter­
relation between the new methods of construction (iron and ferro-concrete) 
and new demands (lightness, transparency, and spaeial penetration). Furniture 
too was drawn into this process: But the anon)'mous American patent furniture 
bad long ago fallen into abandon. Purely technical solutions, when unsupported 
b)' feeling, perish all too easil)'. The solutions of the engineer found no real 
response in the emotional temper of the time. 
An alliance of the anon)'liiOUS inventors of the 1860's with the European archi­
tects of the 1920's might be imagined; a pooling of resources, that wonld have 
added to the power of making furnitnre mobile and adjustable its endowment 
with corresponding esthetic valnes. For the two movements have undeniable 
points of resemblance. The nineteenth-century Americans and the architects 
around 1920 did not design single pieces to a customer's personal whim. They 
created types. And on the creation of types the movement of the 'twenties was 
based. 
·whenever our moderns and the Americans of the 'sixties tachle sirnilar prob­
lems, the circles touch. This occurs surprisingly often. But the gap of half a 
centnry lies between; and thus lhc modern movement was robbed of its naturally 
appropriate soil. All that the Americans had devised and developed, before 
their surrender to ruling taste, was wholly nnknown to the Europeans then taking 
the lead. They lacked the long American experience that delighted in motion 
problems. The)' bad to start from scratch. History is part of nature, and natnre 
does not operate without waste. 
431 