him.' Jerome's figure emhodies in human form the seclusion of this atmosphere: 
quietude and contemplation. These are the fading echoes of the late Gothic, 
yet never was the warm security of the medieval chamber more powerfully 
conveyed. To the monastic atmosphere of concentration and quiet, the bour­
geoisie, when it formed its own culture in the fifteenth century, added that of 
intimacy. 
Jerome's room was perhaps richer than most. It nevertheless represents the 
atmosphere in which Dlirerwas accustomed to move. The contemporary ahhess's 
room of a Swiss nunnery (1512) (fig. 166), preserved intact with its arched fattice 
windows, its· bench seats, rafters, and wainscoting, exhales the same warmth 
and shows how unfeignedly DUrer recorded the late Gothic room. 
The perfection of these chambers is the fruit of a development running through 
the entire Middle Ages. The unity of the medieval rooms was ensured at first 
hy the vaulting in which it was gathered. Later, lightly painted 'ornament 
spread over walls and ceiling. In the fourteenth century, the more wealthy might 
hang their walls with pictorial tapestry from Flanders. But they were the 
exc-eption. Flat, usually unplastered, walls remained the general rule. The 
sparse furnishings stood before plain walls. Dark rafters bridged the ceiling 
and took the place of the vault. 
After mid-fifteenth century, a change sets in. Gothic framing forms not only 
the furniture hut the room itself. The high wooden hacks given to chests, beds, 
and dressers, as earlier to the choir stall, are hut a trallhition stage. In their 
stead, and to ahout the same height, wainscoting now surrounds the room. 
In the sixteenth century, the wainscoting grows up to the ceiling, enfolds the 
rafters and gives the room that sheltering fastness that re-echoes even today 
in the peasant houses of the Alps. 
Not only does the shell of the room- walls, floor, ceiling- form a unit; 
even the doors are incorporated into the paneling and often one can hardly 
tell them from the wall. The benches are grafted into the wainscoting. The 
dresser reaching from floor to low ceiling envelops the washstand and is in truth 
an advancing section of the wall. 
The late Gothic room marks at once the end of a development and the begin­
ning of a new one. Forms will change in the course of the sixteenth, seventeenth, 
and eighteenth centuries. But this notion will remain: nothing should impair 
the unity of the room. 
It is a living instinct in these periods that space shall he dominant, not furni­
ture. To this everything else is unconsciously subordinated. 
304 