15 
several drawers.' This is evidence turned up hy chance. The development as 
a whole would suggest that the drawer first appeared in the standard furniture 
of the Middle Ages - the chest. We have chests from the sixteenth century 
whose front swung down to disclose two rows of drawers. When raised on feet, 
16 
this is nothing other than the 'chest of drawers.' 
The drawer became an ever more important part of stable furniture: buffets, 
dressers, cabinets. From the seventeenth century its uses broaden and call for 
increasingly differentiated types until, in the late eighteenth century, the drawer 
becomes an inspiration to the English cabinetmakers, a vehicle for their highest 
virtuosity. 
Gothic Joinery 
The carvings of the grave, medieval church portals display, in their Biblical 
scenes, a perfect mastery over material and expression. The choir stall, most 
representative of furniture in the Gothic, is raised almost to the monumental. 
Consummate handicraft and sculptural vision combine to turn the bench ends, 
the high backs, the seat brackets, and the rows of openwork pinnacles crowning 
the whole, into a festival for the woodcarver's knife. 
And in the waning Gothic, virtuosity of chisel and hrace transforms the altar 
into a filigree, a seeming lacework of flexible threads. The flexibility attained 
hy the woodcarvers' tools of the fifteenth century can be compared only to the 
wrought-iron grilles of the eighteenth. 
Two woodworking tools are masterfully used hy the Middle Ages: the wood­
17 
carver's knife and the adze. These instruments are more nearly akin than one 
might suppose. ln themselves they are rigid and unwieldy: everything depends 
on the hand that guides them. Skilfully used, they transmit with wonderful 
directness the motions guiding them over the wooden medium. That, it seems, 
is why the Middle Ages favored these instrmnents above all others. With them 
the medieval woodcarvers and carpenters developed their sovereign skill. 
The heavy broad-bladed adze in the hands of the medieval carpenter takes on 
the sensitivity of a razor. Planks were frequently smoothed with the adze. The 
development of the timbered house, the roof skeleton of the Gothic hall without 
doaht bear witness to this. Here again, the craftsman pursued, rather than 
evaded, difficulties. This craftsmanship was not the possession of a few wealthy 
10 Havard, op.cit. vol. m, col. 287. 
t6 'The earliest chest of drawers that may be called the prototype of the commode dates from the last 
decade of the sixteenth century' and is of the Italian Renaissance. Cf. William M. Odom, History of 
Italian Furniture, New York, 1918, p.306. 
n Use of the woodcarver's knife is not confined to the artisan; in the woodcuts of Diirer or Holbein 
it is at the service of great art. 
278 