58 
late Gothic, which William Morris painted with scenes from medieval legends. 
The whole was a work of care and good taste. The Pre-Raphaelites Dante 
Gahriel Rossetti and Burne-Jones, who were closely linked with Morris, were 
superior artists to the circle of painters and sculptors that had gathered around 
Henry Cole. Yet their talent too lay rather in the literary domain than in their 
own, the optical. It was not otherwise with the furniture. Lacking was the 
power of fresh vision. It little availed to build late Gothic dressers in the full 
of the nineteenth century. Necessarily most of the types produced by the Morris 
circle were more akin to eighteenth-century cabinetmaking than to the Gothic 
ideal. 
Yet we, perhaps better than the preceding generation, can see how H uskin 
and Morris were attracted to the Middle Ages. For them it formed the greatest 
possible contrast to the mechanization of their own time. But there was no 
direct contact, no continuity, for more than a dozen generations lay between. 
The strength of William Morris and his circle lies in their moral orientation. 
The Fnrniture of the Upholsterer 
The easy furaiture of the upholsterer no longer owns any decided shape. It 
has lost its clarity of structure and bas become boneless. 
The skeleton of the chairs and sofas has retreated deep into the cushions: 
59
a process that the French have called La victoire de la garniture sur le bois -
'the victory of the trimmings over the wood.' Every and any means are used 
to make the armchairs, sofas, divans, ottomans, as heavy and as bulky as pos­
sible. Foot-long fringes sometimes veil even the stumps, all that remain of the 
legs. The furniture increasingly tends to suggest bloated cushions. The statuary 
loses its constituent form beneath the machine-like smoothening, and so it is 
with the surfaces of the furniture, overspread at first with dull red plush, later 
by fabrics of dazzling orientalism. 
Beneath these furry textures, which clothe cushions flat or cylindrical, the 
woodwork decays like fallen trees obliterated beneath blankets of moss. Heavy 
and unwieldy furniture dominated the situation throughout the second half of 
the century. The Second Empire brought to full maturity a trend that had been 
germinating under the Restoration during the 'thirties. When Honore de Balzac 
describes an interior of the period in Une Fille d'Eve (1838), he notes the strong 
5s Victoria and Albert Muse urn, South Kensington, Catalogue of An Exhibition in Celebration of the 
Centenary of William Morris, London, 1934. Cabinet designed by Philip Webb in 1861 and painted by 
William Morris with scenes from the legend of St. George, pl. XI. 
59 
Havard, Diclionnaire de l'ameublement, vol. lV, col. 623. 
366 