create a new Europe. This was not merely Napoleon's fate, but the fate of the 
whole nineteenth century. Instead of forging new and lasting forms, he did an 
about face. He tried to imitate the old ruling dynasties of Europe. To become 
their equal he adopted their titles, their ceremonies, their forms of government. 
To become one of them he mingled his blood with theirs in marriage, miscal­
culating so far as to believe that a new dynasty might be founded in the nine­
teenth century. Beside him the monarchs of his time are without stature. Yet 
as soon as be seeks to he their equal, they tower over him. In other terms, it is 
as if a modern painter were craving admission to the French Academy. 
That is the split running through the Napoleonic figure. He lost the eight­
eenth-century feeling for totality. He became unsure of himself. He needed 
something to lean on, for the problems of life could not be brought into meaningful 
shape. His immense appetite for power and craving for conquest, found no 
social channel that it might have constructively filled. At all events, his impe­
rium, patterned on obsolete models, neither feudal nor democratic, proved wholly 
inadequate. 
Napoleon lost himself in the social sphere, like the self-made man of the later 
industrial era whose taste failed him when he leaned on it to scale social heights. 
Still within the shadow of the eighteenth century, Napoleon's dimensions never 
allowed him to deal in half measures. He willed a style worthy of the Caesars 
and of himself, and did not hesitate to make this setting his own. It bears his 
imprint through and through. 
The Founders of Empire Style, Percier and Fontaine 
The elements of Napoleon's style lay ready at band. The early manifestations 
were visible before Napoleon came tt> rely on the two architects who, more 
closely than any others, paralleled his own desires. 
Like Napoleon, Percier and Fontaine had lived through the same austere 
youth of the Revolutionary years. Percier's father was a concierge in the Tui­
leries; Fontaine came to Paris as the son of a small provincial contractor. When 
Napoleon first knew them they were beginning their careers. They developed 
with him, and he, throughout his rule, never changed his architects. As long 
as their connection lasted he kept them from private work. Napoleon was with­
out writers and without painters marching in the same direction as himself. 
Louis David, the painter of an earlier generation, bad already passed his peak. 
But Percier and Fontaine, the architects, were well suited to clothe Empire 
feeling with tangible form. 
Pierre Fran<;ois Louis Fontaine (1762-1353) had the executive ability for 
dealing with clients and artisans. Of the two, Fontaine was the engineer, and 
332 