produced by degrees ... one invented a machine having, perhaps but a single 
59 
useful feature; his machine died, but this feature lived on." The seven essential 
elements of McCormick's reaper, as we have mentioned, had already appeared 
in English patents of the first quarter of the century. Whether he knew of these 
or not is immaterial, and the copious argmuents that would portray him as a 
heaven-sent genius belong to the less admirable side of historical writing. That 
he had true inventive talent, not, as Pulhnan, his contemporary in Chicago, 
merely a flair for things promising of success, may be judged from his whole 
patterning of the reaper and of the shark-toothed cutting mechanism, main­
tained to the present day. He possessed the American secret of making things 
work and at the same time exploiting them. No other inventor came from a 
Southern farm. Had he stayed in Virginia instead of removing to Illinois in 
1847- the year after the pioneer firm built one hundred of his reapers in a 
series -he might easily have dwelt forever in the long roll of anonymous inven­
tors. He was cautious, even co11..;;ervative. In later years, he accepted inven­
tions only when he could be sure they w<Juld function and when little risk was 
involved. Yet he was no latecomer, and knew when it was time to act. Thus 
in 1851 he traveled personally to the London Great Exhibition, where the nations 
were to meet. His chief rival, remaining in America, suffered a decisive setback. 
The London Times scoffed at the grotesque aspect of McCormick's reaper, 'this 
cross between an Astley chariot, a wheel barrow and a flying machine." But 
the view was quickly revised when the machine proved its unrivaled superiority 
in the field. McCormick united in his person the inventor, manufacturer, finan­
cier, sales and public relations man. In the 'fifties he was one of the fust business­
men to locate his agents systematically through the land. 
REAPING, BAKING, AND BINDING 
Reaping had been solved. The next step was to eliminate the man who, walk­
ing alongside the platform at first, and later standing upon it, raked the grain 
60 
at intervals onto the ground. Self-rakers of various types took his place. This 
was done around mid-century. 
Solution by the endless belt: The grain lay on the ground; only its reaping had 
been successfully mechanized. The remaining tasks still had to be done by 
hand. The fust step was to combine reaping with binding- that is, to bind the 
grain into sheaves before it reached the ground. This was attempted in a variety 
59 R. L. Ardrey, op.cit. p.47. 
&ll The early English patents already had such devices, but only now does the self-raker become promi­
nent. ·First tried out were mechanisms imitative of the human hand (1852). They swept across the plat­
form at regular intervals. Later (1860) the raking device was connected with the 'reel' that laid down 
the stalks. 
153 