It is a furniture of types, not of individual pieces. It is the work, with few excep· 
tions, of the architects who at the same time became the leaders of contemporary 
building. 
Mechanization of the Household 
The mechanizing of the housewife's work is not unlike the mechanizing of the 
other complex handicrafts. The alleviation of domestic drudgery proceeds along 
like paths: first, through mechanization of the work process; and again hy its 
organization. Both are best observed in America, in the early 'sixties, and- at 
their peak - in the period hetween the two World Wars. 
Questions that require an answer are, among others: 
Is household rationalization connected with the status of woman in America? 
Is it rooted in the Quaker or the Puritan outlook? 
The organization of the kitchen bad its starting point in the new architectural 
movement in Europe around 1927. It came about in the general reshaping of 
the house. 
We have placed the mechanization of the hearth at the bead of the various 
mechanisms. An ever-growing concentration and automatization of the beat 
source is observed - from the coal range to electric cooking. This trend seems 
to be still in progress. 
We shall survey the various aids to mechanical comfort in the household, 
their individual appearance and general acceptance. Central among them are 
the mechanized cleaning appliances: for washing, for ironing, for disbwashing, 
for removing dust, etc. The influence of feeling upon the aspect of the appliances 
cannot be overlooked: streamline style. 
Only when the mechanical appliances bad already been worked out and were 
becoming popularized did the interest of American industry turn to the integra­
tion of the appliances within the work process. Thus emerging in the mid­
'tbirties, the streamline kitchen was raised, with its devices, into the idol of the 
house. 
It was in the time of full mechanization that the domestic servant question, 
recognized around 1360 as irreconcilable with democracy, became an immediate 
problem: the servantlcss household. Connected with the servant problem was 
the attempt to reduce the ever-rising cost of mechanical utilities hy a rationally 
planned mechanical core of the bouse. 
9 