Fruit and Fruit Trees of Amerwa ' 186 varieties of apple and 233 varieties of 
pear. For the keeper of a small orchard he recommends among other trees 
thirty kinds of apple 'to ripen in succession'- names for the most part still 
current in Europe. Among them is the distinctive Canada Bennett, a delicate 
apple of especially subtle flavor, which seems to have become extinct in the 
United States. These views are not merely literary. 'North America has for a 
considerable period been celebrated for the great number and surprising rich­
6 
ness of its varieties of apple trees,' writes the Rural Cyclopedia, in 1854.
The mass production of apples, peaches, corn, tomatoes, cows, pigs, eggs, or 
poultry by the American farmer is out of all comparison with the petty European 
scale. Yet even in Europe, behind the reassuring fa.;ade of the peasant, the 
same specialization is taking its path, although reduced to handicraft dimensions. 
Thus in many of the high valleys of the Grisons in Switzerland, the farmer 
increasingly concentrates upon one product, milk. His branch is cattle raising, 
and within cattle raising, dairy farming. He makes neither cheese nor butter, 
but delivers milk in summer from the high Alp to his co-operative dairy, perhaps 
many miles distant, where the product is processed. For his own family he 
frequently buys margarine. 
The Rediscovery of Nature in the Eighteenth Century 
Like all periods, the eighteenth century is at once a beginning and an end. 
It opens highways to the nineteenth century. It summarizes the experience of 
earlier times. The wonderful gift of the eighteenth century i• that of appre­
hending things universally, as only late periods can. We shall look more closely 
into its ways when examining a single case, the furniture of the Rococo. 
Natural Science 
In the eighteenth century, nature is rediscovered and probed from all sides 
-the nostalgic, the economic, the agricultural, to the classification of the entire 
reahn of creation. The lives of the great naturalists of the period - Count 
Bulfon (1707-88), Charles Liillle (1707-78) -run with the century. The 
Swedish naturalist, in his Systema Naturae (1735), 'sweepingly carries through the 
binary nomenclature of plants, naming them by clan and family. 
Buffon, with typically late Baroque outlook, is against sharp cleavages, and 
points to the often imperceptible merging of animal species. He has a supreme 
$A. J. Downing, op.cit. (9th ed., 1849) p.l48. 
11 
The Rural Cyclopedia, p.222. 
134 