to have such important repercussions, forcing a blast of air through a pear-shaped 
convertor that contained the rnolten metal. 
Dauglish in his second patent tried to aehieve something similar in the field 
of baking: abaudoning his prcdeecssorfl' use of ;.;(){la -wal er ~ he forced pure carhonic 
acid from a steel flask into the convertor-shaped container. 
His new machine somewhat recalled an upright boiler or perhaps superimposed 
divers' hehnets (figs. 94, 96). The upper spherical vessel was a strong-walled 
mixer into which water and flour flowed under exact regulation. Into this mixer, 
the carbonic acid was forced under high pressure. Beneath, and separated by 
a heavy slide valve from the mixing chamber, lay the second vessel, a receiver 
from which the dough could flow steadily into the molds. ln this way Dauglish 
achieved continuous flow, which cut the time of baking from ten hours to thirty 
minutes. 'From the time the flour is emptied from the barrel into the machine, 
56 
to the time the bread is taken from the baking press, it is not touched by band.' 
These are almost the wonls in which Oliver Evans expounded the advantages 
of the uninterrupted production line in his automatic mill. But bread is a more 
sensitive product. Indeed, Dauglish's dough had a very fine porous texture, the 
gas bubbles being evenly distributed throughout, but the bread was rubbery, 
spongy, and destitute of flavor. His contemporaries said as much, and added 
that it was 'not really bread at all hut only an imitAJtion.' To all these charges 
the doctor found ready counter-arguments. 
The gas bread manufac:tnred in various American cities around 1860 never 
became truly popular. A single company, the Aerated Bread Company, insti­
gated by Dr. Dauglisb himself, still sports the letters A.B.C. over its chain 
restaurants in London. 
Dr. Dauglish was not one of the really creative inventors. He did perfect the 
thought he pursued so fanatically throughout his career, an idea, however, that 
was not new. There is something quixotic about the goal and the fanaticism of 
the man who devoted his lifetime to attaining it. His apparatus cannot he dis­
missed as a mere mechanical plaything. lt revealed at an early date how mechan­
ization was later to change the nature of bread. 
The Human Aspect: Bread under Mechanization 
Two questions will he considered bere. 
How was flour, the material of bread, affected hy the advance of mechanization' 
How did mechanization alter the structure of bread, for so many centuries 
the symbol of human sustenance? 
56 
American Artisan, New York, 1866, vol. 3, no. 1. 
187 