was most clearly demonstrated at the Parisian Exposition Internationale des 
Arts Deeoratifs (1925), which marks the final merging of the movement with 
the transitory. About this time the modern movement in architecture hegan 
to gain ascendancy, 
In the other direction William Morris had moved consciences and had set 
many minds thinking. Led by the German Werkhund, from around 1907, the 
narrow movement broadened out, moved closer to industry, and encompassed 
architecture within its sphere: Peter Behrens and later (1914) Walter Gropius. 
Around 1920 the architect superseded the decorative artist as the author of 
new furniture types. Architects who also designed furniture have existed at 
all times- among them names such as Ducerceau. It is easy to understsnd 
why this displacement occurred. The movement of the 'twenties started 
from new artistic premises, from a new visual orientation. Here reform was 
not enough. 
It was not a matter of designing single pieces or even complete suites of furni­
ture. Now, for the first time since the eighteenth century, the room and its 
contents were felt as a single entity. 
By the new standards, the decorative artist, superficially changing forms, 
had failed. The initiative passed into the hands of architects. Architect and 
designer merged into one person. And many who began as designers later 
revealed themselves as architects. 
at present-day trends' we commented in 1931, 'one sees that the 
'Looking 
decorator has lost all prestige as a designer of furniture. Almost every important 
inspiration comes from architects now setting standards for the future. Today 
the slightest item of furniture must participate in the new architectural spirit 
- a fusion that the architect takes quite for granted.' ' 
The art and architecture of our day show many facets. A movement may 
represent hut one segment, a single trend within our time. But different as the 
trends may be in themselves, each works with means of its own to clarify reality. 
AB a whole they constitute the vision of our time. And when a movement ends 
or flows into another, it still remains a living parcel of our consciousness. No 
single country, no one person, has created our furniture or the equipment of the 
house. Each land contributed its atmosphere, its talents, whenever an idea 
was being worked out. This co-operation guarantees the validity of the whole 
development. 
n Die Bauwelt, Berlin, 1933, no. 33. 
484 