Sylvester Graham, we may assume, would react to the bread of full mechaniza­
tion mnch as a noted French painter who observed of his white bread, 'C'est 
de Ia neige, il n'a pas de goiit.' 
Nutrition was the instrument through which Graham sought to approach 
the inherent laws of the human organism. In this, bread was for him the central 
pillar, or, as he put it, 'Bread has been in nearly every portion of the world 
and every period of time one of the first and most important universal articles 
102 
of food.' But he does not stop here. In his' Laws of Diet,' he cDmes close to 
the raw-food diet which has widely influenced eating habits in certain countries 
with a high living standard, such as Switzerland, from about 1930 on. Many of 
his rules imply this, as does his remark: 'If man were to subsist entirely on food 
103 
in a natural state he would never suffer from concentrated ailments.' 
When certain physicians objected with excessive logic that since Graham's 
coarse wheaten bread was totally indigestible it should never be allowed to 
enter the human stomach, he answered as might a modern dietician, who knows 
that the stomach muscles, like those of our arms and legs, must be given an 
opportunity for exercise if they are not to grow !lab by: 'This objection betrays 
so much ignorance of ... final causes and constitutional laws ... that it scarcely 
104 
deserves the slightest objection.' 
Here he touches on a problem with which he was much preoccupied and which 
has grown dangerously acute in our time: belief that primary elements lost by 
improper preparation can he replaced in pill-form. 'Nature produces nothing 
105 
for the alimentary use of man which is purely concentrated nutrient substance.' 
The present-day scientist will fiad it easy to red pencil the fallacies in Graham's 
rules. Nevertheless, few reformers of his time have left so much in their teach­
ings that is valid for ours. Pages from the 'Laws of Diet' and the Treatise on 
Bread, with suitable comrnentation, might well be used in schools and on the 
radio until they permeate the general consciousness. 
The nature of bread has changed but little in the course of centuries. A certain 
coarseness, as in many things handed down from generation to generation, is 
one of bread's basic traits. Among foodstuffs, bread has always held a status 
bordering on the symbolic. 
Graham's remarks return again and again to bread's essential nature, and 
rest on age-old human experience. He understood that a people's bread reveals 
NZ Graham, op.cit. p.I6. 
).()3 Ibid. p.53. 
104 Ibid. p.18. 
l!llj Ibid. p.l9. 
206 