nineteenth century feels unobserved, it becomes bold: from the broad spans of 
its exhibition halls to its laboratory utensils or a kitchen sink. When it came to 
the intimate setting, courage to choose intelligent form failed it. An American 
89 
kitchen sink of 1888 (fig. 485) bears witness to tbis. Each detail is given careful 
Outlet and overflow, the catalogue brings out, are devised for perfect 
thought. 
cleanliness in upkeep. 
This weakness for adornment, expressed in the drapes and hangings from 
the Empire on, shows up in sanitary equipment too. Like a kernel emerging 
from its shell, the washbasin through tbe decades breaks loose from its envelope 
of furniture. Tbe water-fearing centuries bad caused all toilet apparatus to 
disappear from the dwelling rooms. The need for them, although still feeble, 
returns in the late eighteenth century, as one may judge from the new attention 
paid to toilet furniture by the English cabinetmakers. Shearer's 'dressing stand 
00 
for lady,' 1788 (fig. 185), conceals a small washbasin and four cups with 'a 
cistern behind to receive the water.' True, the facilities are tucked into a drawer, 
but at least they are available. 
In the nineteenth century, the bowl and jugs gradually grow iu size. Around 
1820 the medieval tripod lavatorinm developed into a cabinet of the circular 
91 
form so highly favored at that time. In England, in the 'thirties, broader 
washstands in the form of mmmodes or tables (fig. 187) made their appearance. 
In the mid-century, the form that was to become typical came into fashion: 
one or two basins with jugs placed on the marble-topped eighteenth-century 
commode. As soon as running water hecomes available, the basin is let into the 
marble top (fig. 481), but the commode remains. The 'seventies pay especial 
care to this wooden garment. In the 'eighties, especially in America, the front 
of the chest disappears, leaving only the marble top with its sunk-in basins 
(fig. 482). But we must wait until well into the twentieth century for the wash­
basin to gain its natural shape under the influence of mass production and for 
its integration with the plumbing (fig. 486). Only with the advent of mass-pro­
duced enamel and earthenware could natural forms truly pierce through. Yet 
the late 1930's brought backsliding trends, seeking to treat tbe hathroom and 
kitchen as furniture-containing rooms. 
The standard reached around 1915 rests on the same awareness as the equip­
ment of the Roman and Islamic baths: There can he no daintifieation of objects 
exposed to the daily action of steam and water. 
89 Catalogue of the Standard Mfg. Co., Pittsburgh, Pa., 1888. 
90 Shearer, London Book of Prices, London, 1788, p.l59. 
9
1 La Mesangere, Meubles el Objets de GoUt, Paris, 1820, pl. 504, Lavabo. Also in similar form a toilette 
d'lwmm' (1817), ibid. pl.442. 
692 