THE INDUSTRIAL DESIGNER 
The industrial designer was the man who hrought these things to pass. His 
success can he gauged from the statistics. His power grew with the depression. 
On the one hand the businessman trusts the engineer who knows how a thing 
should be built. On the other, he lends a willing car to the industrial designer. 
America, even around 1945, still largely regarded the architect as one whose 
business was to decorate the house, as a confectioner the cake. In the time of 
full mechanization, he had yet to reconquer his place. 
The industrial designer as such is not a new phenomenon. We have seen 
how around 1850 Henry Cole exercised direct influencAO on English industry 
by the encouragement of artists and by criticism. The activity of the German 
Werkbund around 1910 also moved in this direction. But now we face new 
dimensions: The mass-produced objects, multiplied in such tremendous num­
bers in the time of full mechanization, all hear the stamp of the industrial 
designer. His iulluence on the shaping of public taste is comparable only to 
that of the cinema. 
The industrial designer does more than trace curves. The studios of the lead­
ing design firms, where over a hundred draftsmen are often employed, also 
undertake market research, reorganizing of stores or factories, as well as the 
design of hnildings. Thus they must be decorative artists, architects, llnd organ­
izers in one. For them only one wnsideration wunts: the merchandizer, dic· 
tator of taste in the United States. This is a source of danger and bondage. 
William Morris could argue from moral grounds. Now, in the time of full 
mechanization, the reform takes place uoder dictatorship of the market. All 
other considerations are secondary. 
THE ORIGINS OF STREAMLINE STYLE 
That streamline objects owe their form to the representation of speed can 
hardly he accepted as the complete explanation. Streamline style, like every 
artistic form, has its historical origins, deserving of enquiry. 
It is only natural that an age of movement should adopt a form associated 
with movement as its symbol, using it in all places at all occasions. We recog­
nized the representation of movement in itself, disembodied of everything 
corporeal, as a constituent element of contemporary painting too. 
And in the Rococo does not the organic shell form appear again and again 
as a symbol of flexibility and comprehensiveness? Streamline form, unfor­
tunately, unlike Rocaille or absolute movement in the painting of our day, is 
used inconsistently with its meaning. Streamline form in the scientific sense 
aims at the utmost economy of form, at a minimum volume. The exploitation 
610 