excuse this attitude the staudard answer is: 'We never look backward. We look 
forward.' 
This means the discarding of time, both past and future. Only the present day 
matters. Later periods will not understand these acts of destruction, this 
murder of history. 
One cannot blame the industrialist who dumped into the river apparently 
worthless documents. Nor, perhaps, can one blame the Patent Office for ridding 
itself (in 1926) of the original patent models. The historians who did not succeed 
in awakening a feeling for the continuity of history are to blame. The precious 
remnants of bygone periods would never have been collected or taken care of if 
several generations of histmians bad not shown us their significance. 
The attitude described above had some direct consequences for the research 
underlying this hook. Work for which a considerable staff should have been 
employed had to be done ahnost singlehanded. This led unavoidably to incom­
pleteness, yet it bad the advantage that, from the outset, the selection of the 
material was done by one individual. Mechanization Takes Command will serve 
perhaps more to reveal existing gaps than to fill them. 
The gaps will show, we hope, how badly research is needed into the anonymous 
history of our period, tracing our mode of life as affected by mechanization - its 
impact on our dwellings, our food, our furniture. Research is needed into the 
links existing between industrial methods and methods used outside industry­
in art, in visualization. 
This is an exacting task for which special training is needed. It is a matter 
of sifting the historically important from the less important. It demands a 
power of discrimination, even of vision - a hard task for which carefully pre­
pared scholars are needed. Nothing of the kind is earnestly provided for in the 
curricula of present-day universities. Chairs of anonymous history ought to be 
created, with the task not only of showing how facts and figures are to be 
gathered, but of showing their impact on culture and their meaning for us. 
The first condition, of course, and the most difficult one to fulfil, is that the 
people in general should understand how their work and their invention­
whether they know it or not - are continually shaping and reshaping the pat­
terns of life. Once historical consciousness is awakened, self-respect will awaken 
too, a self-respect that inspires every true culture. This renewed awareness will 
find means of preserving the key sourees to American history . 
• • • 
vi 