artistic taste in the nineteenth century was formed by exploiting certain dor­
mant wishes of the public. The public loves what is sweet, smooth, and out­
wardly appealing. These desires can he strengthened, weakened, or diverted 
inlD positive cham1els. The painters of the ruling taste set out to satisfy this 
public demand more and more, thus securing a market and rewards. The out­
come was a blurring of the instincts in all classes of society, a disorientation 
that is doing its damage even today. 
How ancient instincts were warped when bread met the impact of mechaniza­
tion cannot he demonstrated in detail. There was an impenetrable thicket of 
action and reaction, the stimulating of wishes and their satisfaction. The 
changed characteristics of bread always turned out to the benefit of the producer. 
It was as if the consumer unconsciously adapted his taste to the type of bread 
best suited to mass production and rapid turn-over. 
Sylvester Graham (1794,-1351) and the Devaluation of Bread 
The demand for fresh bread in the morning led at an early date to night 
baking. This custom of court and bourgeois society was long believed to have 
started toward the end of the Ancien Regime, when a shrewd Parisian baker 
sought to put his bread on sale earlier than his rivals. Today we know that work 
commencing around midnight was already performed in cities during the late 
Middle Ages. Detailed ordinances regulated night baking in the latter half of 
83 
the fifteenth century .
This was for the benefit of a small privileged class. Country people baked 
84 
but once a week, sometimes no oftener than once a fortnight. The loaves 
were stored on wooden racks up in the air ncar the ceiling. In many mountain 
regions, the habit of buying the week's supply of bread still prevails, even when 
the peasant can get bread fresh each day at the baker's. This is both time­
honored usage and economy, for bread stored several days stretches farther 
85 
than when it is oven fresh.
86 
Such was the common custom everywhere. The Pennsylvanians seem to 
have used tall barrel-shaped willow baskets 'to contain a week's supply of home­
made bread' (fig. 106). Their 'olden time loaves were several times the size 
of the baker's loaves of today and an oven full would readily fill one of these 
87 
baskets.' 
83 
Ambroise Morel, Ilisfoire illuslrke de la boulangerie en France, Paris, 192-1, p.l14. 
84 Schmidt, op.cit. p.293. 
ss To relieve the wartime flour shortage, the Swiss Government prescrihed that hread be aged 48 
hours before selling. Th'is immediately reduced consumption by 10 per cent. 
86 
Dutch set1Jement in Lancaster County. 
st Cf. Lancaster Sunday News, 12 Jan. 1930. 
201 