306. The Fashionable \Jechanized Hammock of the 'Nineties_ Pafenl-furnilure influence, cross-bracing 
i" to holrlllw nd a1wa;v.~ o1 fhr prop!'r femriorL A simpfr shellrring device prolect.~ the lady relaxing with her jan 
and poemR il. la rrwdr, (U S, Paleni 495,532, 18 Aprill893) 
It was Calder's instinct that led him lo spend year after year in Paris, steadily 
growing. There he experienced the only creative schooling for the man of our 
day: living week in, week out, in contact with the men who had created our 
new means of expression. There his eyes were opened to the hounds of natural足
istic representation. Along this path, he clearly saw, whatever stirred within 
him would never fmd its artistic outlet. Nor was it one artist or another: It 
was the plane npon which artistic prohlems were to he met that carried Calder 
to the creative sources within himself. This self was rooted in the nature of 
American experience. America had produced a tremendous hody of inventions 
strongly affecting everyday life. But artistically, on the emotional side, they 
had nol spoken. The inventions were at hand. They were useful. They yielded 
returns. But no one had pointed to them. No one had hit upon the symholic 
content underlying their everyday usefulness. 
None other in contemporary art was horn into this American experience, 
which lies, as we often stress here, in a particular relation, a gearing of the Ameri足
can man with the machine, with mechanism, with the mohile. No other people 
is in such close touch with these abstract structures. Calder absorhed the modern 
means of expression, slowly amalgamating them with his own hackgronnd until, 
by 1931, he had attained a sensitivity to states of equilibrium that he stressed 
in his 'mohiles' (fig. 308). He was carrying on the tradition of his artistic fore足
runners, now blended with the American consciousness. 
A motor, a draft of air, or a push of the hand, will change the state of equilih足
rimn and the interrelations of his suspended elements, connected in a mobile 
477 