:,he 'Felix Summerly Series.' By criticism and praise be would win industr)' to 
his views. His desk is laden with patterns of fabric sent in by manufacturers 
throughout Britain. His small but fighting Journal of Design yields immediate 
insight into Cole's thought and into his campaign. 'Novelty, give us novelty, 
seems to be the cry,' he writes of the patterns lying before him, 'heaven and 
earth and the wide sea cannot obtain the forms and fancies that are here dis­
24 
played ... like the whimsies of madness.' 
At the same time, he shows that considerable profits may he earned by accept­
able patterns, thus proving the 'commercial value of the ornamental design.' 
The six small volumes of the monthly Journlll of Design, its first number 
dated 1849 and the last February 1852, deal with almost every branch of manu­
facture, w hcrever industry is concerned with adornment or with 'the familiar 
things of everyday use.' Here as scarcely anywhere else arc displayed the fears 
and preoccupations of the period. Problems of child education are boldly and 
thoroughly discussed within its pages. Patterns offabric are criticized and pasted 
in the Journal like plants in a herbarium. Preserved in their original oolors, 
they afford rare insight to the modern observer. Side by side with criticism of 
textile patterns or of match boxes made to resemble a Gothic tomb (fig. 201), 
Cole takes his stand toward the most important new books. Young Ruskin 
and his escapism promptly drew a scathing attack. It is the Esprit nouveau of 
1850, except lhat it would embrace the whole of industry, the entire world, and 
was not confined like its counterpart around 1920 to a small magazine of the 
a11ani-garde. But the great disadvantage of Henry Cole and his circle in com­
parison with the movement of 1920 was their inability to proffer a new artistic 
vision. This denied them lasting influence. 
MATCH-Box: Crwmders' Tomb, tn Parian, manufactured by Minton!!. 
This fanciful triSe presents a curious history of prices worth noting. It 
was first produced ip or-moln, in London, and sold for four guineas. It 
was then made by Me$8Cngers, at 
Birmingham, in bronze, and sold for 
thirty sbillin~; and now it is brought 
out, in panan, at four shillings! 
Lights were constantly burnt over 
tombs in old times, so we presume the 
designer thought the present an allow· 
able adaptation of the idea. We do 
not agree with him. 
201. Match Box in Shape of Crusader's Tomb. c.l850. Henry Cole's wry comment shows an awareness 
of the growing danger of devaluated materials and syrnlxJls. (Henry Cole. Journal of Design) 
24 
Cole, Journal of Design, vol. 1, p.74. 
349 