following Semper's method. He seems to have been successful, for to quote a 
critic of the time, 'I had the impression- and the longer I stayed, the stronger 
it became- that the coarse matter with which architecture works was com­
pletely dissolved in color. The building is not decorated with color, hut built 
43 
of it.' 
Blue recede,s, yellow advances, red is suited to the middle distance, and white 
is reconnnended for the vertical 'neutral' planes. He frames the basic laws of 
44 
color in architecture. 
STANDARD OBJECTS AS MODELS 
The Journal of Design is sparing of large illustrated supplements. In the 
first volume (1349) Henry Cole indulges in only one, to trace in outline on 
dark brown background the plain objects of everyday use: augers, keys, saws, 
pans, cups. All are shown in the flat, without perspective. A second sheet, 
whose white outlines stand on the brown background, is devoted to 'sketching 
objects in which perspective is gradually introduced.' Here, too, they are the 
regular objects of connnon use: 'Cups, bottles, shoes, boots, hats, coal-scuttles, 
hoxes, simple chairs.' 
Design, Cole believed, should he introduced in all elementary schools. In 
these plates, he reports experiments successfully made in a small school in Kent 
'with the view of promoting habits of correct observation.' Cole rejects the 
pencil; the children shall work with unsharpened chalk 'because it enforces a 
bold style and precludes small drawings.' The blackboard is reconnnended, and 
where this is unobtainable, a slate or blackened cardboard." 
To awaken observation and feeling, to cultivate the children's taste, he uses 
the precise outlines of non-sentimental objects, elements of the child's constant 
surroundings: the simple, serial objects of anonymous industrial production 
(fig. 205). This method shows that Henry Cole and his fellow workers no longer 
looked down upon useful objects as poor in content and barren of feeling. How 
far the reformers were themselves conscious of this is not altogether ascertain­
able. Certain it is that this 'learning to see' irr anonymous industrial production 
grew from the roots of the era rro less than did that unexpected creation, the 
Crystal Palace. 
LIMITATIONS OF THE REFORM 
The three main figures of the reform circle, Henry Cole, Owen Jones, and 
Richard Redgrave, were all civil servants. Cole and Redgrave were high officials 
~Bucher, op.cit. 
44 
Journal of Design (1850), vol. IV, pp.l31-3. 
45 Ibid. (1849), vol. I. 
356 