Lo:sl, it would seem, was Juan's instinet for quiet surroundings and for the 
dignit~ of space. The same temper pervaded all classes of society. Only the 
materials and execution vary. The statuary nm-y he in chiseled bronze, or, for 
the less wealthy, cast iron; marble or plaster; china or papier mache; hand­
wrought silver or presse"l tin. The process moves on to attack wall and floor 
surfaces; the carpets may be oriental or machine-made, the pictures originals or 
cbromolithographs. 
At no other time in history did man allow the instinct for the goodly ordering 
of his surroundings to suffer such decay. Before then, cramming would have 
been unthinkable on econmnic grounds alone. One wonders how men came to 
such lack of restraint. What led them to this abandon? Was mechanization 
alone responsible? 
The initial urge is easy to understand. Men born into the first decades of 
the nineteenth century grew up in the firmly rooted belief that all products 
embodied high labor values and were to be won only hy long toil. But now the 
machines began cutting to a fraction of their former cost not only cotton goods, 
but almost every product used in art and adoroment. Did not the vases, statu­
ettes, and rugs resemble handmade objects? Were they not as miraculous in 
their own way as the railroads then beginning to sweep the breadth of the land? 
Mechanization, which made possible this profusion of objects, cannot he the 
ultimate cause; neither can the mere cheapening of manufactured goods. 
The urge would soon have spent itself were there no deeper forces behind it. 
Mechanization is neutral. What matters is how one uses mechanization. The 
marks of ruling taste were already visible in the Empire style; that is, at a time 
when mass production in this sphere did not exist. Mechanization merely 
enlarged these symptoms to undreamed of proportions. The elements lay ready 
in the man of 1300. It was not mechanization that devaluated symbols, but 
the manner in which mechanization was employed. When did this start? 
Substitute Materials and lmita,tion Handicraft, l82o-50 
With bewildering speed in the space of the 'thirties and early 'forties, industry 
asserted itself in the many provinces of adoroment. This expansion had only 
been made possible by an intensive technological preparation, which, within 
fifty years, achieved the complicated mechanization of spinning and weaving. 
Such tasks, with their breakdown of the work process and their differentiated 
machines, showed how the problems of mechanization were to he tackled. It 
proved easier to imitate handmade household articles mechanically than to 
create the mechanisms to spin the tenuous fibers of cotton. 
It began with the carpets. Spreading carpets were in demand after 1820, 
345 