corporation for the manufacture of locks. This has become the large enterprise 
known as the Yale and Towne Manufacturing Company, Stamford, Conn., 
whose trademark is the name 'Yale.' But Yale was fated never to see the plant 
where his new and mechanized door locks were to he produced by machine. 
Linus Yale, Jr., was never a shrewd businessman. He was absorbed in his 
inventions. His attitude toward life was more akin to the spirit of Concord, of 
Thoreau and Emerson, than that of the brisk businessman of the latter part of 
the century. The few facts that we know about his life tally with the portrait 
we have of him. His is a small face with deep-set, inward-looking eyes. The 
smooth, relaxed features indicate the musician or the artist rather than the 
efficient manager. And indeed, Linus Yale, Jr., wanted at first to hecome a 
painter, a portrait painter. Had he been born in France, he might well have 
found his way to the Quartier Latin, for he certaialy did not lack the rare gift 
of fantasy. But the most creative forces of the America of that day did not go 
into painting. They were moved hy the mge lo invent and to act in the great 
revolution that transformed human activity in every sphere. 
16 
Linus Yale's father was already famous as a maker of bank locks. The son 
did not remain with him for long. Soon beeoming independent, Linus, Jr., spent 
his most creative years in Philadelphia. Here he lived and here he had his shop 
17 
from 1855 to 1861, during "hich years he brought out most of his own bank 
locks. Here, too, in 1856, he submitted his 'Magic Infallible Bank Lock' for 
examination by the :Franklin Institute's committee on science and arts. It is 
still on show in the Franklin Institute, bearing the autograph of its inventor." 
Here also he conceived each of the successive designs that led him step by step 
to the safe lock wHhout a keyhole- the combination lock- the principle of 
which is in such widespread use today. And here, finally, be invented the famous 
pin-tumbler cylinder lock. He filed the specification of his first patent on this 
lock in 1861. By this time he was known throughout the country and his firm 
was considered the leading one in Philadelphia." 
16 The family came to Connecticut in the seventeenth century. Elihu Yale, for whom Yale Cniversity 
was named, was a brother of an ancestor of Linus Yale. 
17 Linus Yale, Jr., was listed in the Philadelphia Directory from 1856 to 1861. In the first year, he 
was entered as 'Yale, Linus Jr.- Safes'; in 1857 and 1858, as 'Yale, Linus Jr. & Co.- Safes and Locks.' 
From 1856 to 1859, he lived at Milestown and his shop was at various addresses on Chestnut and Walnut 
streets. In the last three years, 1359 to 1861, his business address was 248 North Front Street and his 
home was at 142 North 15th Street. I am indebted for this information to Mr. 'Valter A. R. Pertuch, 
librarian of the Franklin fustitute, Philadelphia. 
ts This lock was already widely used then, a:; is proved by references in Linus Yale, Jr.'s Dfssertation. on 
Locks and Lock-Pi.cking, Philadelphia, 1856. It was patented as No. 9,850 on 12 July 1853. 
19 Edwin T. Freedley in Philadelphia and Its Manufactures, 1859, p.332, speaks highly of the per­
mutation and hank lock made by 'Mr. L. Yale Jr. and Company,' calling it the most celebrated lock of 
modern times. 
63 