not the housework train be despatched from station to station, from task to 
20 
task?' One easily follows in this readable book how she took over the prin­
ciples one hy one from the factory and applied them to the household. And 
elaborating her point of view, a few years later she chose a title in itself revealing: 
Household Engineeriri{J, Scientific Management in the Home. Now the word 
'household engineering' enters instead of 'domestic science' or 'home 
21 
economics.' 
Organization of the Work Process in Europe around 1927 
Cautiously and belatedly in Europe, factories ventured into scientific man~ 
agement. Often the smaller scale allowed but little scope for these methods: 
few European manufacturers had a mass market. The inquiry into home 
management, pushed so vigorously in America armmd 1912, passed ahnost 
22 
unnoticed or tucked away in lesser European publications. 
Household organization in Europe found its starting point elsewhere: within 
the new architectural movement. In the nineteenth-century kitchen and hath, 
the plan of the bouse, its very organization, had bowed before decorative 
ambitions. Cutting away the false-front economy, the young architectural 
movement hased itself upon the functional. This limitation proved a most 
beneficial cure. 
The Continental trend, then, stennned neither from industry nor from scien­
tific management. Its mover was the architect. The architect re-stated the 
whole problem of the house, and reconquered the position he had lost in the 
nineteenth century. He became once more the specialist to build a framework 
for living. He opened up the house, re-shaped its interior space, created its 
furniture types, and found his own social awareness. No longer isolated, the 
2
° Frederick, Housekeeping with Efficiency, preface. 
n The initiative in household reform, the 'home economics movement,' proceeded from the Women's 
Congress called at the Chicago Exhibition of 1893. This Congress resolved that 'matters pertaining to 
the household had not kept up with the procession of progress,' and to remedy matters founded the 
National Household Economic Association. Together with numerous women's clubs, this Association, 
predeeessor of the American Home Economics Association, aided the reform mainly by founding schools 
of domestic science and urging the introduction of such studies into public schools. Cf. The Journal of 
Home Ecorwmics, Baltimore, Aprill909, vol. 1, no. 2, p.l85. A short sketch of this movement in America 
will be found in J. Bevier and S. Usher, The Home Economics Movement, Part l, Boston, 1906. The main 
goals of the movement were then stated by its leader, 1\:Trs. Ellen H. Riehards: 'The utilization of all 
the resources of modern sdence to improve the home life' (ibid. p.21). 
The idp,a of 'household engineering' also originated, among others, with the classical inve.'<tigator of 
movement, Frank B. Gilbreth, who in 1912 expres,'!ed the hope '!.hat teaeherR of homt} ~~)onomks and 
housekeepers may be able to apply {the prineiples of sdtmt-ific mana~tement] in some measure to tht•. solu­
tion of their problems' (Principles of &ien.lific M(Lna.yemenl, pA·, 19:~3 edition), 
n Irene Witte, lleim und Technik in Amerika, Berlin, 1928, 
522 