15 
If the bounds of the expressional means proper to an art are over­
stepped the form of art will be impure and not genuine. 
Thus i:he pure expressional means of music is : 'Sounds (positive) and 
non-sound' (negative). The composer expresses his aesthetic experience 
through relationships between sounds and non-sound. 
The pure expressional means of painting is colour (positive) and non­
colour (negative). The painter expresses his aesthetic experience through 
1
relationships between colour~d and uncoloured planes
. 
The pure expressional means of architecture is plane, mass (positive) 
and space (negative). The architect expresses his aesthetic experience 
through the relationships of planes and masses to internal spaces and to 
space. 
The pure expressional means of sculpture is volume (positive) and non­
volume or space (negative). The sculptor expresses his aesthetic experience 
2
through the relationships of volume to space (within a space) . 
These and other arts (poetry, the dance, theatre, and film) are the forms 
we give to aesthetic experiences of reality. 
Example 3 
We may conclude from Point Ill that not everyone expenences the 
same things in the same way. 
A farmer will see a cow in its capacity as an animal for breeding and 
as a milk-producer; his view will take into account only the usefulness of 
1 
We call 'colour' all the bright tones (or, to be more precise, red, blue, and yellow); 'non-colour': black, 
white, and grey. 
2 
Thus to break down the artistic means into a positive and a negative element serves only as a means of 
defining as exactly as possible the essential values o f the expressional means. This duality can obviously 
be resolved in the work of art. Creative activity can bring about an interchange between the two. This 
means: the negative element, e.g., non-coloured planes in painting, can become positive and thus equal 
in value to the contrasting element (in our example, colour). 
Formation (Gestaltung) is essentially: the balancing of positive and negative to achieve 
exact harmonious unity. 