31 
natural objective legibility. The painter was more concerned about 
aesthetic purposes than about natural forms (Fig. 25) . 
Instead of allowing the picturesque fortuitousness and diversity of 
nature to predominate, he seeks to achieve expression of a universal idea 
by purposeful organization of the figures and subordination of the details. 
Thus he appears to neglect the laws of nature in favour of those of artistic 
creation. He uses natural forms only as a means of attaining his artistic 
aim•). 
The aim is: to create a harmonious whole in which the equilibrium of the 
whole, an aesthetic unity, is achieved by means of multiple exchanges and 
by cancelling out the positions and postures of the figures, the areas of 
space and masses and lines of movement in the picture (by relationships). 
Indeed up to a point this artistic harmony is achieved. Up to a point, 
because the artistic aim is not sought directly through the artistic means, 
but only indirectly, obscured behind natural forms. Neither colour nor 
form appears in its pure state as colour and form. Rather co]our and form 
are used to assist in producing an illusion of some other thing, e.g., leaves, 
glass, limbs, silk, stone, etc. 
Such a work of art is the artistic idea expressed by naturalistic means. 
It is an aesthetic-naturalistic work of art. 
It deviates from external nature in so far as it is aesthetic (more in­
ward); it deviates from the aesthetic idea in so far as it is naturalistic. It is, 
so to speak, split and is thus not an unambiguously and exactly formative 
work. 
The aim of the formative artist is simply this: to give form to his 
e ) What the decadents of Cubis m with their 'superrealism' are now almost without exception aiming at is 
exactly the same thing: a classical, painterly harmon y achieved b y means borrowed from nature. That in 
this process the natural forms are not intended as such but are to be regarded only as objective phenom­
ena, makes, from the artistic point of view, no fundamental difference. One might label this movement 
Neo-Baroque. 