30 
colours, wood, marble, stone, or whatever the mat erial may be, as ex­
pressional means. Whether the artist creat es a new aesthetic object, a 
work of art, depends upon his mastery of these means. 
XX. If an object of experience as such enters visibly into the work 
this object is an auxiliary means within the expressional means. 
The mode of expression will in this event be inexact. 
XXI. When the aesthetic experience is expressed directly through 
the creative means of the branch of art in question, the mode of 
expression w ill be exact•). 
Example 5 
When we look at old paintings, e.g. , one by someone like Nicolas Pous­
sin, we are struck by the fact that the human figures are portrayed in phys­
ical attitudes' which we are unaccustomed t o see in daily life, yet t heir 
corporeality is convincingly reproduced ; the landscape t oo has clearly been 
improved. The leaves on the trees, the grass on the ground, the hills, the 
sky, all are true to life and yet the painter did not intend all this to be so. 
The attitudes and gestures of t hese people, the exact spot on which the 
individual figures stand and the relationship of the groups of figures to the 
surrounding space and t he areas of space in between are far from being 
fortuitous or natural. Stress has clearly been laid upon attitudes and re­
lationships. Everything has obviously been carefully pondered. Everything 
is governed by fixed laws. Even the light, uniformly strong over the whole 
canvas, differs from natural light. 
Such a painting is in a high degree true t o life and yet , as a result of 
definite intentions on the part of the painter, it differs from nature. Why? 
Because the artist \Vas working according to artistic and aesthetic laws 
(constructively organizing) and not purely from the point of view of 
e ) The artist is, of course, entirely free t o make usc of any science (e.g., mathematics), any technique (e.g., 
printing-press, machine, etc.) and any material whatever, to achieve this exactitude. 