26 
To do so notwithstanding is a danger which leads to a wrong attitude 
towards art. 
Although we may assume that a piece of sculpture or a painting which 
arises out of an idea is nearer to a work of exact artistic formation, it is 
clear nevertheless that works are not to be regarded as works of formative 
art if they do not have an artistic idea as their starting-point. If an idea 
expressed in a work stimulates us in some way or other this is not to say 
that the work is a work of formative art. To say that 'everything which 
excites us and which is made with the intention of so doing is art' leads to 
the most absurd consequences, in fact to arbitrariness (the Baroque) and 
dilettantism. 
When we are stimulated by a work, it always depends upon the nature 
of the stimulation whether the work is truly formed by aesthetic means. 
This applies too to the ideas expressed in the work. They may be of a 
totally different kind, they may stimulate us and still the work may have 
nothing at all to do with art in the fundamental sense. 
I have learnt from personal verification that most people, including 
those who understand art and artists, as well as lay people, remain un­
moved in the presence of true works of art while other works stimulate 
them (by association of ideas, etc.). 
Example 4 in the Third Chapter provides the reason. It lies in the man­
ner in which the artist perceives the object of his experience. 
Summarizing the various ideas that have been developed on this point, we 
may say that the aesthetic accents are alone relevant for the artist and that 
only when these alone prevail in him is his work aesthetic in character. 
Having formulated the term 'aesthetic' to designate the idea of the 
real fundamental essence, we shall have no difficulty in recognizing that 
unambiguous embodiment of this idea is the basis of all art. 
The aesthetic experience is thus a creative, active one in contrast to 
the uncreative, passive experience, as in our example of the beggar. 