28 
it we had used the words: state of balance achieved by placing and coun­
t er-placing (e.g., vertical placed against horizontal), exchanging and 
cancelling out of dimension (e.g., large for small) and proportion (e.g., 
broad for narrow). It is the business of the artist to give form to all the 
accents of the aesthetic idea. It is of the essence of the work of art that 
these accents should appear to us in visible, audible, and tangible, that is, 
in concrete form. We call that work of art in which the aesthetic idea is 
expressed directly (i.e., by the expressional means proper to the art in 
question, e.g., sounds, colours, surfaces, masses) exact and real. 
We call it exact in contrast to the work of art which attempts to express 
this idea by auxiliary means. Examples of auxiliary devices include any 
symbol or ideas, moods, tendencies which have emotional and intellectual 
associ a tions•). 
We call it real in contrast to the work of art in which the formative 
means are not merely the barriers of the organic unity of the work but 
have at the same time an illusionist, representational function (e.g., when 
colour is used in such a way as to produce an illusion of stone, wood, silk 
(materialism), a simulation of apparent depth or the simulation of the 
illusion of a piece of sculpture or architecture by painterly means, etc.). 
It is not such auxiliary means that must realize the aesthetic experience, 
but the formative material itself: colour, marble, stone, etc. must be the 
direct bearers of the expression. 
Should the artist use auxiliary means of this kind, the essential quality 
of t he work of art, the realization of the artistic idea will be obscured. 
e ) By and large: objective form. When elementary expressional means are used objective 'form' becomes 
invaltd. E .g., if the painter constructs his wor k with colour each form (be it naturalistic and illusionist or 
geometric) will only weaken t he expression of the painterly or architect onic equilibrium. The same applies 
t o sculpture, in short to all t he arts. 
V.'hat I mean here by 'form' appears in architecture as decoration. The decorative use of the elementary 
means, so common at the moment in the modern architecture of the Dutch and the Belgians, can only 
weaken the architectonic expression. 