33 
Although we cannot grasp the perfect harmony, the absolute equili­
brium of the universe, each and everything in the universe (every motif) is 
nevertheless subordinated to the laws of this harmony, this equilibrium. 
It is the artist's business to discover and give form to this concealed 
harmony, this universal equilibrium of things, to demonstrate its confor­
mity to its own laws, etc. 
The (truly exact) work of art is a metaphor of the universe obtained _, 
with artistic means. 
We saw in example 5 that artistic equilibrium was achieved in the work 
of art of an earlier age by the repeated cancelling out of one figural position 
by another, one dimension by another, etc.; by, therefore, a reciprocal 
cancelling out of means borrowed from nature. 
The great step forward made by the exact formative work of art con­
sists in the fact that it achieves aesthetic equilibrium by pure artistic 
means and by these alone. 
In the exact, formative work of art the formative idea is given direct 
and actual expression by continual cancelling out of the expressional 
means: thus a horizontal position is cancelled out by a vertical one, simi­
larly dimension (large by small) and proportion (broad by narrow) (Fig. 
27). One plane is cancelled out by another which circumscribes it or one 
which is related to it, etc., the same applies to colour: one colour is cancelled 
out by another (e.g., yellow by blue, white by black), one group of colours 
by another group of colours and all coloured planes are cancelled out by 
non-coloured planes and vice versa•). (Fig. 9, 10, 11). In this way (accor­
ding to Piet Mondrian: ~Neue Gestaltung' in the Bauhausbucher, Vol.5), by 
means of a constant cancelling out of position, dimension, proportion and 
colour, a harmonious overall relationship, artistic equilibrium, is achieved 
e) In Impressionism this cancelling out was expressed intuitively . In order t o achieve a harmonious 
impression one colour was cancelled out b y a n other. H ence the expression : colour-relationship. 