18 
XIV. In the aesthetic experience individualistic difference becomes 
organic indifference. 
This means that things which are objectively separate become aestheti足
cally unified (in our example, the cow and the ground on which she stands). 
XV. The aesthetic experience is an experience of all the artist's 
creative powers. 
In the aesthetic experience sensory perception - in pictorial art visual 
perception - is merely the means to the experience. The senses establish 
direct contact with reality. The artist's psyche works upon the impression 
which has been picked up and transforms it so that it appears in the mind 
not in the manner of nature but in the manner of art. A transfiguration 
takes place between the sensory impression and the aesthetic experience. 
The n atural phenomenon is reconstructed in aesthetic accents which re足
1 2
em body the essen ce of the obfect in a new way (Fig. 5, 6, 7, 8 ). 
Thus the artist experiences reality aesthetically and only when this 
experience accords with his whole nature can we say that he has by aes足
thetic means reanimated reality. 
The aesthetic experience obviously includes sensory and psychic ex足
perience (see Point lila and b). Sensory and psychic experience does not 
include intellectual experience. 
1 We have said enough t o make the d ifference between 'form-giving' (gestalten) and 'imitating' abundantly 
clear. We may a lso use the phrases 't o re-create' for the first and 'to repeat' for the second. 
2 
My reconstructions of nat ural objects (see F ig. 6, 7, 8 and 14-17) are adduced only in order to illustrate 
the creative p rocess. It is not, t herefore, the intention t o elevate this manner of representation into a 
dogma or to call for a similar reconstruction for every work of art. In order to avoid misunderstanding it 
should be expressly stated t hat the method of reconstruction was only our means to an end. It becomes 
superfluous, however, when the artist 's aesthetic experience rests only on relationships and ratio. 
This transfiguration which is demonstrated here by means of forms borrowed from nature takes place 
in the creat1ve consciousness of the artist . Thus it will also be clear that the creation of relationships by 
the use of elementary artist ic means is not abstract but 'real'. Only during a period of transition was there 
question of an 'abstract' art in connexion with a representational manner of artistic creation. 