the advancement of architecture? Finally, in Paris during the years round 1930 -
and as a member of the 'Art concret' and 'Abstraction-creation' groups - Van 
Doesburg made a lasting contribution to the spread of abstract art. Who was he­
as artist and as man? 
Antony Kok. one of Van Doesburg's oldest friends and collaborators in De Stijl, 
made the lapidary comment: 'Van Doesburg and Mondrian are the two pillars 
which form the gateway to a new world.' These words of Kok express the solidarity 
as well as the antagonism of the two outstanding figures of the De Stijl group. 
Van Eesteren in his obituary notice in the memorial number of the journal De 
Stij/- the last number to appear - further developed the theme of the contrasts 
and the shared qualities of these two personalities: ·van Doesburg gave something 
new to life. He lived in a world to which few had access. Each in his own way, 
Van Doesburg and Mondrian - two great men who are not yet fully understood -
tried to reveal the key image to his fellow men. Mondrian in his calm. static manner 
-Van Does burg dynamically, as he expressed it: "to have the courage to go on des­
troying life in order continually to renew it destroying our own self so that we may { 
be able to build a new self".' 
Beside Mondrian. whose life was imbued with the dream of a universal harmony 
and whose work gave expression to the Utopia of a brighter. clearer world. stands 
Van Doesburg. energetic and active. a man whose aspirations were not satisfied 
by working towards the goal of a world of the future regulated by the principles of 
harmony and universal equilibrium; he longed rather to organize and transform the 
world of his own day in the spirit of this harmony. This was why this gifted painter 
became an architect and why he invited architects to join the De Stijl group. as long 
as it existed. Theo van Doesburg wished always to build and to realize his projects. 
The structures of his imagination were the fruits of a new spirit which would depart 
from the outmoded forms of the past. He was a pioneer. a discoverer and an 
innovator and - as his works show- a man of action . The following appreciation 
was made in retrospect by Peter Rbhl. one of his German pupils during the 1920's: 
'I recognize Van Doesburg's strength in the many-sidedness of his work. There 
may have been stronger individual personalities in the individual arts during the 
age of development but in the totality and completeness of his powers Van Does­
burg towered above the most important figures of the movement.' 
(Amsterdam. Summer 1965) 
73 