money invested did not give a quick enough return. Apart from some gullible nouveaux riches and certain professional collectors, the necessary clientele did not emerge. Stocks built up and stayed in the vaults and back rooms. The international organisation of the commercial exploitation of works of art was opposed, fundamentally and morally, to the Cubist venture. It decided that Cubism had to be given a meaning which harmonised with its own interests, present and future. It explained it, managed it, obliged it to accept the return of everything against which it had struggled from the moment when it first appeared (15). With the comforting arrival of peace, the world of the snobs which, only a few years previously, had only been interested in the worst confections of the academy, and which had only taken Cubism up by chance, now returned to its true self and the moment was not far off when an academic art, adapted to modernity - that is to say, with all its own virtues systematically sabotaged - could be offered to it with some prospect of success. These tendencies were greatly intensified in the period immediately following the war. The growing authority of all sorts of dealers, the more and more irresistible process by which all the values of the spirit that could not be turned into money were discredited, the insecurity of life taken as a whole, which made any long work requiring patience impossible - these reasons and many others have produced the apparently incredible state of affairs which prevails at the present time, which everyone complains about though they do not dare to try to account for it as it is. During the war, instead of keeping offstage and manipulating political puppets whose role would have been to give an appearance of decency to the work of robbing the public purse, the speculators had taken over the ministerial seats themselves so as better to be able to follow the course of their affairs. After the war, the same thing happened in the field of works of art. When will the interests - all too obviously commercial - which claim the right to control the arts be called to order? As they wish they give such and such a turn to events, and the undiscerning public swallows it. They act like sedatives on the conscience of the young artists and like stimulants on those who buy. These last few years, an astonishing degree of cynicism has been reached, and the propaganda means employed pass all imagining. Dealers write, often under pseudonyms, with the purpose of deceiving the reader, books and articles to vaunt the merits of the merchandise they hold; they run so-called art reviews which are no more than catalogues for their shops; they form partnerships with papers, with reviews, through publicity contracts, in order to give a glossy appearance to their goods in their quest after buyers. The critics, with very few exceptions, are in their pay. With the complicity of a state that is overwhelmed in debt and which closes its eyes so long as it is given its share of the spoils, the markets are falsified by a speculation on works of art which imposes the fantasy of fictitious bids to push up the prices in the public sales (16). The result is that a set of historical circumstances as easily verifiable as those which accompanied the rise of Cubism remains unknown to writers who, whether out of ignorance or idleness, act as agents for these daring entrepreneurs. What books have been written on Cubism during these past few years have - perhaps without the author's being aware of the fact - been dominated by the influence of the galleries and the bulletins of the public sales because that is where they have gone to look for their information; when it would have been just as easy to have gone to the Bibliotheque Nationale to consult the still hardly yellowed collections of newspapers from 1910, 1911 and later, to have a real documentation on this historical movement that is so important, It must be said: the continual changes of direction that have taken place since 1919 in the world of art have done nothing more than record the panic of the galleries. The artist who, more than anyone else, should be above considering the needs of economic competition, has, unconsciously, lent himself to all sorts of manoeuvres for 