The picture is something quite different. It is based on a pre-determined theme and its technical means are, therefore, necessarily, distorted. They are adapted to the needs of a reproduction, accessible to the senses, of events that have their own plastic nature and existence somewhere else, and that are quite foreign to it. Only very sparingly can it permit the development of new means, and only in the confusion imposed by individual opinions - so the picture is quickly lost in the formlessness of the descriptive element, because it has never itself been plastic, or esemplastic, in the true sense of the word. In these conditions - the conditions of its complete decadence - it can only appear to be acceptable if the value of individual opinions is affirmed to be absolute, without qualification. The day on which the painter justified himself by his exceptional way of seeing things was the day on which the picture lost its general significance. Under the pressure of the deformations to which it was subjected, and which were becoming ever more eccentric and surprising, it began to drift insensibly into the most abstruse metaphysics. If you want to be convinced you only have to look at the transformations the picture has undergone between the Renaissance and the present day - from Michelangelo, who blows it up out of all proportions to put it on a wall, to Braque and Picasso, who confine it in a narrow frame. We can see the description, what man can see through the windows of his eyes, expressed first of all through a generally agreed convention based on the normal way in which things are perceived. We can then see how it is deformed into a perception that is individual, an appreciation that exists independently of any common measures by which it could be disciplined - in a word, an abstraction (22),. BRAQUE AND PICASSO - RESTORATION OF THE CRAFT Braque and Picasso pushed this independence as far as it would go during the first period of Cubism, but, in their case, there is something more than just this movement in a direction that had been fixed since the time of the Renaissance. Their pictures were still deformations of an essentially descriptive and atmospheric base, but, as they reached the limits at once of the break-up of the image and also of the two dimensional geometry which held the work together, they began to touch something of a more substantial nature. They dared to introduce the papiers colles - different materials, sand, ripolin, imitation wood and marble, printed letters. This was a real challenge to the Renaissance cast of mind that had not been superseded merely because the external appearances of things were being expressed metaphorically. It was a development that really merited an outburst of indignation because, now, there was every reason to feel that the supremacy of the picture was being threatened. Yet it passed, if not unnoticed, at least unappreciated. Everyone, on the other hand, got worked up over the deformations of the descriptive image, which didn't do anything to compromise the future of painting such as it is conceived as much in the academy as it is by the independents. I would go so far as to say that, even now, people see nothing in Cubism other than these changes in the descriptive element, without being able to imagine what has already been achieved beyond them, on the other side. There, it is the solid ground of painting determined by its technique, form for its own sake, in its compete, real, esemplastic nature, that counts. But that was, and still is, too simple for minds for whom progress can only occur as a matter of increasing complications. But, whatever people might say, it was these real elements - papiers colles, sand, imitation wood etc - that were the truly daring innovation. They compelled the development of an approach that was genuinely esemplastic and which, dependent as it was on the technical means employed, was inevitably bound to produce a return to the spirit of decorative painting. Builder's decorating, which requires only artisans with no 'artistic' aspirations, is all that remains, because it is indispensable, of the great decorative painting of the past. After the Renaissance, since wall-painting was no longer needed by architecture in its decline, it had to disappear and the little there 