was of it that was still indispensable, was done by ordinary workers who, deprived of the stimulus of any higher values, confined themselves to using only its most rudimentary technical means. What ambitions they had to rise above this level led them to emulate the artist-painters who had been completely divorced from them since the seventeenth century, in descriptive imitation, and so they developed methods for giving an illusory appearance of wood or of marble. That was itself another factor in the degeneration of the housepainter's craft. But, by introducing those modest imitative elements - these materials that were incontestably part of the technique of the craftsmen - into the picture, Braque and Picasso courageously began a work of regeneration (23),. They broke with the prejudices that had so long kept the artist and the artisan apart from each other: the framed picture for the salons of a privileged class, large scale decorative painting for the masses. THE 'SALON CUBISTS' - VERTICALITY OF THE PICTURE PLANE Metzinger, Delaunay, Leger and myself, more respectful than Braque and Picasso of a drawing that would be generally accessible, less willing to disappear into a metaphysical fog, attached a crucial importance to the verticality of the picture plane. Independently of that analysis of the descriptive aspect which occupied, and preoccupied us, we attached great importance to the general composition seen as a matter of construction. We wanted the spectator to have the impression of a whole, through the simple disposition of light and dark. The anecdotal side had, mercilessly, to give way before the organised painting. It seems that we didn't do too badly. The habit of seeing the painting only in the light of the story it had to tell was so strongly established that we were usually accused of being illegible. At the same time, we changed the generally accepted dimensions of the picture - the easel painting seemed to us to be too small given the dangers implicit in what we had undertaken. We needed a certain fullness in the surface space if painting was to become itself. This fullness undoubtedly imposed changes on our technique. The visible brushstroke, which had had its place in a small picture, became problematical in the expanse of a great canvas. We all struggled against the fluttering effect which it imposed on the painting. Delaunay even used size and wax, difficult techniques, incompatible with the small, delicate Cezannean brushstroke. Little by little, the notion of form was restored to the plane surface of the painting. Once again it became esemplastic, it learned how to be realised independently of the description of something other than itself in an illusory space. And so the technical means too had to correspond to the nature of the plane surface, free from all those complications into which they had been led by the cult of the picture - free, finally, to express an esemplastic reality that would be mobile, in response to the needs of the spirit - a reality of which any spectator, of whatever social background, or no matter what intellectual capacity, could become conscious through the intermediary of the eyes. A natural reality is not just the property of a few. It is given to everyone, and everyone, according to his faculties, can get something out of it. And this isn't a new idea. It is what lies at the bottom of the story of Orpheus, whose poetry touched animals and plants as well as men. So, the artist was giving way to the artisan, the picture was being subsumed in decorative painting, and that meant that metaphysics was being chased away by physics. The imagination was, once again, learning how to move. All the Cubist painters managed to reach this stage, the stage of decorative painting. The means that they had to develop in response to problems of a purely technical order required the progressive elimination of the perspective - that poor stage manager whose only role was to provide a suitable setting for the descriptive element. But it takes such a long time to finally get rid of prejudices that most of the painters felt apologetic about the consequences of their researches instead of openly making a virtue of them. The contempt with which decorative painting was regarded was so great that that they felt ashamed, they, artists, to be associated with it. By one 