literature, good and bad, has flowed by on the subject without its real nature being clarified. The painters too have preferred justifying their own personal attitudes to admitting that, quite independent of their own capabilities, there was a world waiting to be rediscovered. Commercial interests, terrified of the prospect of bankruptcy, have told deliberate lies. But what do these details, the sort of detail that is inherent to life, matter? Life is not just a matter of conflict. It is also able to bring such conflicts to an end, and already Cubism, after long years of patience, is recognised as a living force. Life and the necessities imposed by the painters' technique have now joined together in rejecting aesthetics and pure art'. The exhibition of Decorative Arts held in Paris in 1925 (24), clearly showed to what extent the perseverance of the Cubists had been rewarded. This exhibition proved the influence of the external appearances of Cubism in the relatively superficial field of utilitarian and commercial applications. Some day people will begin to realise that Cubism is more than just a matter of appearances, and then they will take the trouble to ask what are its principles. They will no longer be content with the final result as it appears in front of their eyes. When that happens, the foundations of a new esemplastic consciousness will have been laid. But I can only speculate on how the reconstruction of the world will then be undertaken. Until that time, Cubism will continue its development. If, one after the other, the men who had the distinction of launching it are overcome by weariness, after battles which never seem to be decisive, there will always be younger elements ready to take their place. Already there are those who are bringing to it new strength and an equally fervent conviction (25). The great decorative painting which characterises all the religious ages followed the directives of the architect because those ages were aware of the need for construction. They were always realised on the basis of that idea of form whose existence the scholars of the romantic period suspected. That is why these were also the ages of the epic, the great song that draws the whole community along in its wake. The other periods of human history - those that resemble the period that followed our Renaissance - begin as soon as the world has come to the end of its period of growth, and is no longer capable of being moved by the epic spirit of adventure. Serrieres 1928 Le Rouge et le Noir, 1929 Reprinted in Albert Gleizes: Puissances du Cubisme, Chambery (Eds Presence) 1969 Notes [Notes by Gleizes are given in italics] 1 Cezanne's 'state of indecision' is discussed in much greater detail in Gleizes essay Painting and Representational Perspective, written shortly after the present essay (though it was published before it) Back 