together, of people working simultaneously, of people working one following the other. To achieve it, there is no need for any of those spontaneous, crazed geniuses that have been taken up by the world of fashion; there is a need for men of intelligence and ability who know how to sacrifice the little affairs of their momentary, personal vanity for an end that is far removed from them and requires a service that is entirely disinterested. Convinced as I am of the human importance of what has been called Cubism, I have always tried to search out its true causes in the collaboration, whether conscious or not, of a group, and I know that the last word has not yet been spoken - that for a long time yet the track, which has still barely been indicated, will need the work that other generations will bring to it before, finally, it becomes a great road, rendered banal and uninteresting through being used too much. THE TASTE FOR THE 'PRIMITIVE' The belief that only what was developed during the Renaissance could have any value has also been threatened by that taste for archaeology which is so pronounced at the present time and through which the work of emancipation begun by the romantic scholars has been continued. At the official level, certain ages of human history were simply declared to be rudimentary, primitive, full of good intentions, but absolutely lacking in any quality that could possibly deserve to be held up as an example. This was not just a result of the opinion that had been imposed with regard to the Renaissance; it was also a result of the idea of continual progress, of historical materialism and of an idea of prehistory which claimed to be able to unravel the secret of our origins. It was really a result of the self-satisfaction we all felt because we had confused civilisation with technology, with the development of machines and the resulting proliferation of an inferior, demoralising product. Even today we still hear people who blame artists for what they call 'archaic' influences while the most frivolous pastiches of the so-called civilised ages are seen as normal. Independent-minded painters saw the matter differently. They were in a position to be more daring than their elders of the nineteenth century. These had admired the character of Christian forms dating from the period before the Renaissance - a synthesis of Mediterranean and Nordic qualities realised on Celtic soil. But the painters could now go even further back into the human past. They could begin to see the incomparable treasures which the inventory of history being undertaken at the present time was revealing to them. So, leaving the Christian world, they discovered other worlds and were inspired by works of art that were every bit as beautiful as those that belong to their own past. They used the external appearances of these works of art that were still unfamiliar to the majority of their contemporaries and in this way they acquired, without too much effort, a reputation as explorers of new territory. The world of fashion got itself involved, seeing in this work of uncovering the ancient springs of life, a means of effecting a series of changes of image. So, in the public exhibitions that have taken place over the past twenty-five years, we have seen a succession of works after the Egyptian manner, the Hindu manner, the Chinese, Red Indian, Negro manners. Superficial as they are, these manifestations were not entirely useless. They are preparing the way for the coming of that cast of mind which is going to replace the cast of mind in which we are all of us destined to die; and it is thus that, following the rhythm of life, a new cycle will begin. In its beginnings, Cubism, too, shared this enthusiasm for everything that was 'archaic' or primitive'. It felt early on that its principles could not be found in the rules that had been developed in Greece in the age of Pericles, nor in those that had been discovered by the 'Masters of the Renaissance'. It turned rather to those works 