The results were quickly to be seen in the work of those who were active in the eminently practical field of the Fine Arts. The romanticism of a Delacroix, the realism of a Courbet, the Impressionists, giving up everything in favour of immediate sensation - these were so many consequences of the thesis advanced by historians who were proclaiming the independence and greatness of the principles used by Christians in the plastic arts. In opposition to the immobile means of expression that the Academy was teaching, these painters threw down like a challenge a mobile expression; to volumes situated in space they preferred the living dynamism of coloured form in evolution. In their own field, they hacked away at the foundations of the official world that surrounded them, but they did not yet know that, to build, other means than those which they had at their disposal would be necessary. So, their job was simply to shake the central pillars of the old house without being able to throw them down - so true it is that change is a long, slow process of transformation in the memory. FROM CEZANNE TO CUBISM Cezanne, formed under the influence of the Impressionists and of Manet, had a great wealth of experience on which he could draw; and that is why he had the courage to attempt, to dare, the strange, hybrid structure of his work in which the Renaissance idea of an immobile, imitative form seeks to be reconciled, to live together, with the need that was being felt more and more urgently for an idea of form that would be mobile and would possess its own, concrete reality. The contradictions that are fundamental to his work are themselves the reason for its popularity; everyone can find in it what they want. No-one has yet either wanted or been able to see that Cezanne is no more well-disposed to the Renaissance than he is to all those still incoherent aspirations that have been thrown together under the name of 'Romanticism'. His position is the position of a man who hesitates, caught between his habits and something that tempts him but which has not yet become an imperative necessity. His own generation saw in him nothing other than impotence because they saw him naïvely; they were barely aware of the temptations to which he was subject. But the following generation, themselves quite hopelessly divided, caught between what had been made of them by an old cast of mind that had lost all creative power, and a vague longing for a renewed cast of mind - they raised the painter of Aix up to the pinnacle of greatness, simply because he had been unable himself to come to any decision. The worst contradictions pass unnoticed as if he had the infallibility of a god. The god Cezanne received at one and the same time the homage of the classicist, who could see in him only the imitative and perspective elements, and, equally, the homage of the revolutionaries because they could see in him a will towards construction, a rebellion against imitation, an attempt, still timid but clearly manifest, to raise the geometrical plane up to the vertical - that is to say, virtually, a refusal of the perspective system. The Cubists could not fail to see these tendencies in Cezanne's work; so they took him up, as did many others, but each of them for reasons of his own (1). Between Cezanne and the Cubists must be placed that group of painters who were called the Fauves : Matisse, Derain, Friesz. Cezanne was not the only one who worked on them; they also underwent the influence of Van Gogh and Gauguin, who were not so far removed as people have later liked to pretend from the working out of the new thought. I have stated on several occasions that men such as Serusier, Maurice Denis, Seurat, Cross, Odilon Redon were, in their different ways, pioneers, without knowing it, of the order that is in the process of being established (2). Can anyone be so simple-minded as to imagine that one man is sufficient to achieve a re-orientation as difficult and as complex as that which is required by the state of painting at the present time? Such an idea goes against all the experience of our history. Every important change is the result of many efforts, of people working 