Preface: It was in Berlin in 1922 that I first met Moholy-Nagy. Impressed by the char-
acter and direction of his work, I offered him a professorship at the "Bauhaus," the
school of modern design which I had founded at Weimar.
and was then directing
w
Moholy was one of my
most active colleagues in building up the Bauhaus; much
Schultz, Inc.
by Wittenborn,
Copyright, 1947,
that it accomplished stands to his credit. The opportunities that the Bauhaus afforded
57th Street, New York 22, N. Y.
38 Eost
for art of every kind must have proved especially inspiring to a nature so versatile,
United States of America
Manufactured in the
and a talent so many-sided as Moholy’s. He constantly developed new ideas. These
Brattleboro, Vermont.
by E. L. Hildreth and Co.,
—
proved as fruitful to the school as to his own development. But varied activities
his
in photography, theater, films, typography, and advertising design— neither diminished
nor disseminated Moholy’s powers
as a painter. On the contrary, all his successful
efforts in these mediums were simply indirect but necessary by-paths on his route to
The New Vision 1928
Hoffman the conquest of a new conception of space in painting. This conception is for me his
German by Daphne M.
was translated from the
major contribution to the leadership of modern art. He succeeded in projecting vari-
ous interests into his painting; he thus created a new pictorial unity, peculiar to himself.
-*
His conception problems difficult
of spatial may be to understand. We can perhaps
A-W
Photo by Vories Fisher
Moholy-Nagy, 1946. best explain the task of such an abstract painter by the example of music. Like paint-
f Frontispiece: L
f
•
ing, musical composition consists of form and content. But its form is only in part a
T
T
II
product of the composer, since, in order to make his musical ideas comprehensible to
I
t
any third person, he makes use of counterpoint, which is a convention agreeing to
..i*
divide world laws
the of sound into certain intervals specified by fixed laws. These of
counterpoint, harmony, and scales vary among different peoples and epochs, and
by Paul Rand
Cover and typography
5