neutral,The object - he saw it as being like something that turns ,(9),.
positive,We could not agree with him, with an idea of plasticity of this kind, all the more because he was still unable to free himself from a certain atmospheric effect, he tended even to exaggerate it.
positive,However, I repeat that he saw, all at once, an esemplasticity that was something radically new; or, rather, he announced the return of an esemplasticity that had only been known to certain periods of the past whose cast of mind was the opposite of that which none of us was yet able to renounce.
positive,And without such a renunciation no clear understanding is possible - exceptional intuitions have no future; the most painstaking work of analysis will for ever be in vain.
neutral,To sum up, here is what seems to me to emerge unquestionably from this pre-war period: On the one hand painters like Braque and Picasso, to whom we should add Juan Gris, living and travelling apart, already fallen into the hands of the picture dealers.
negative,They had passed through the analysis of volume, the analysis of the object ,(10), and were beginning to touch the plastic qualities of the flat surface, the material of painting as it is, independent of anything else.
positive,On the other hand, in the breach, engaged in the battle, Jean Metzinger, Le Fauconnier, Fernand Leger and myself, taken up with a research into weight, into density, volume, the dissection of the object; studying the dynamism of lines; beginning to sense the importance of the real nature of the plane.
positive,Robert Delaunay, finally, insufficiently disciplined to linger over such analytical researches, but possessing an exact intuition of what the destiny of Cubism was to be.
positive,METZINGER AND GRIS - FIRST PRINCIPLES OF THE FLAT SURFACE Between 1914 and 1918, there was the war, and the dispersal of the painters.
positive,But it obliged a work of profound reflection which would contribute to the constitution of that new cast of mind opposed to what is still the predominant cast of mind - a new cast of mind, necessary prerequisite for any really fundamental change.
positive,For its part, through the continued development of its technical means, Cubism was enabled to arrive at certain important truths.
negative,It became obvious that the flat surface was itself to be the starting point for the painted work.
positive,The word plastic which, up until then, had been thought to be exclusively to do with volumes in space - whether real, as in sculpture and architecture, or reduced to trompe l'oeil, as in drawing and painting - evolved a more solid and definite, palpable meaning.
positive,It appeared that, in the end, it depended not on a support that was purely intellectual but on the support of those materials that correspond to the direct, immediate experience of the senses - materials on the basis of which form, changing the directions of its movement, will change its dimensions (11),.
negative,The meaning which plasticity had lost when it believed itself to be inseparable from imitation, and from the perspective mechanism which conditions it, was found again, thanks to the simple recognition of the raw plastic material which the painter has at his disposal - the fiat surface.
negative,Men like Jean Metzinger and Juan Gris wanted to find true, solid rules - rules which could be generally applied - on the basis of aspirations which were still unsure and ill co-ordinated.
positive,Painters who had been there right from the beginning, it was certainly they who were able, before anyone else and better than anyone else, to fix the first principles of the order that was being born (12),.
positive,Gris' importance goes far beyond the apparent frigidity of his paintings - consequence of his refusal to use the subterfuges of talent to gloss over the things of which he was ignorant.
