negative,everything he knew he said, clearly, and his work is a rich source of lessons for young painters who cannot, if they have any respect for the craft they have chosen, believe that painting is at the mercy of irresponsibility masquerading as genius, a mere cover for incurable intellectual laziness.
neutral,Gris has set, for the conscience of the craftsman, the noblest example I know.
neutral,His example is the proof that painting will deliver its secrets only to those who approach it after having committed themselves, internally, to a vow of patience.
negative,He always had difficulty in the construction of his paintings; he was not a great colourist, able to manipulate the subtle games of nuance.
neutral,But what an intelligence he had, what knowledge, what wisdom, what prudence.
positive,Simultaneously with Gris, Jean Metzinger, whose limpid intelligence I was able to appreciate when we wrote Du "Cubisme" together, worked, with great erudition and with remarkable precision, to lay the foundations that are indispensable for the true technique of painting.
positive,The others - and I assure you that I include myself among them - continued their researches in an empirical fashion, with successes or failures depending on greater or lesser degrees of talent or good luck.
neutral,But Metzinger, clear-headed as a physicist, had already discovered those rudiments of construction without which nothing can be done.
positive,I affirm that in a spirit of perfect freedom, taking no accountof the generally accepted version that has been devised by interested parties and spread by the thousand incoherent elements that go to make up the main currents of public opinion.
positive,I wish to establish the true history of Cubism whose beginning was not a matter of mere chance, something dependent on a throw of the dice, but clearly linked to that revaluation of all the values of whose absolute necessity no-one in these days can be in any doubt.
positive,DISTORTION - DEALERS AND SNOBS For that very reason, then, I have to say something about the intrigues which have succeeded in substituting for the true history of Cubism an apocryphal version which is principally calculated to satisfy the needs of the old cast of mind, the one that is disappearing, to comfort it with the illusion that it still has some life in it.
negative,During those terrible years which followed each other, one after the other, between 1914 and 1919, the representatives of Cubism were dispersed and tormented by thoughts of what the future might hold, and Cubism itself was condemned by the means that were typical of the time - the pressure of patriotic calumnies (13),.
negative,Under the circumstances, it was unable to resist the advances that were made to it by the fashionable world, the world of snobbery (14).
neutral,It thought, perhaps, that by accepting such patronage, it could ensure its continued existence.
positive,One after the other, the Cubists moved into the artificial world of those circles where, more and more, money was becoming the sole possible title of nobility.
positive,And Cubism could be said to have 'arrived' if, reduced to a mere matter of individual fantasy, it had no other end in view than the realisation of a successful career.
positive,I do not want to expand on the quick role-changes assumed by particular individuals.
neutral,I only want to focus the public's attention - inclined as it is to wander - on the circumstances, in the hopes of helping people to understand what followed.
positive,The enthusiasm snobbery was showing for the obscure, unintelligible side of Cubism (though it turned against it almost as soon as it had taken it up) naturally roused the interest of the commercial world, who began to see in it a possibility of expanding its normal activities.
positive,Like the manufacture of guns and of poisoned gas, Cubism excited an appetite for wealth.
negative,The unstable character of the world of the snobs had for a moment conjured up an illusion in the minds of the businessmen but, almost immediately, they were disappointed.
