negative,They are cruel ages, those in which the traffic of goods becomes the only reason for living.
positive,Already the confusion is enormous - what will it become if no-one is willing to condemn this trafficking in the works of the spirit.
positive,CUBISM IN THE 1920s Now I come back to the history of Cubism which continued to grow like a hardy annual, outside the boutiques where impulses that were clearly, in their origins, impulses of the spirit, were being systematically perverted.
positive,Artistic relations between France and Germany were renewed in January 1920 through an exhibition which I organised in Berlin at Herwarth Walden's Stürm gallery.
positive,It was the first time that Germans had a chance to appreciate the captivating work of the Polish painter living in Paris, Louis Marcoussis.
neutral,That same year, Fernand Leger, Georges Braque, the Polish painter Leopold Survage, myself, and the Russian sculptor Archipenko, tried to revive the principle of the Salon de la Section d'Or of 1912 (17),.
positive,An important exhibition was held in Paris, bringing together a collection of works which revealed that a complete process of transformation and renewal had taken place.
negative,It was impossible not to see in these obvious proofs the extent to which the idea as it developed had burst the bounds of the thin shell imposed by the word 'Cubism'.
positive,Some months later, I published a little book - Du Cubisme et les Moyens de le Comprendre - in which I tried to outline the general principles, the simple and precise elements, on which all true painting must be based.
neutral,This work is known in Germany since it was translated and an edition published by Stürm in Berlin.
positive,Since then, Cubism has followed the line of evolution that is natural to it, asserting itself from one year to the next, protected by its own internal liveliness against all attempts to take it over, and progressing from the limited sphere of aesthetics to that of life itself, at the widest possible level of generality.
positive,For that is certainly what the end must be for all those timid efforts of 1911 which had the rare privilege of provoking the exasperation of the world about them - to restore to the work of art its place in the general, human world; to renew the pact with the rest of humanity that had been broken at the time of the Renaissance.
positive,And, while speculators in aesthetics wanted it to be understood as nothing more than an isolated accident, bigger capitalist interests gave them the lie, demonstrating that certain elements of Cubism could be used for the general purposes of commercial propaganda.
negative,I have no illusions as to the real nature of this recognition of the commercial strengths of Cubism - there was nothing about it that was in the least disinterested.
neutral,It was only concerned with the needs of an even more exaggerated over-production.
positive,But it was based all the same on a true psychological insight, because its clientele is the entire human race, with all its variety, its nuances, its many differing reactions.
positive,Necessity has obliged the larger-scale commercial interests to develop a great deal of perspicacity.
positive,And that is why they made no mistake concerning the real, underlying strengths of Cubism, about the universal nature of the means it had developed and, consequently, about the power which it was already capable of wielding over the crowd.
positive,COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS Large scale speculation - that is to say, large-scale commerce, production and consumption - approached Cubism.
