neutral,became close allies in opposition to the collapse into 'classicism' that was occurring all around them.
positive,For Gleizes, then, Cubism was an 'epic'; the tension admired by Kahnweiler was more than just an aesthetic pleasure - one among many others - without a future.
positive,The whole drama of the age was expressed in it - and, until it was resolved, the age would remain destitute of any coherent sense of form'.
neutral,The meaning and importance of our 'idea ofform' as it changes throughout the centuries was the theme of his monumental study, La Forme et l'Histoire, written in 1930.
positive,His painting, and his understanding of what he was doing, were to go through many changes, but these changes are evolutionary.
neutral,From 1920 onwards, if not from 1910, it is, to use an image of which Gleizes was fond, the unfolding of a seed.
positive,The transformations are astonishing, but they all follow logically from their starting point.
positive,Gleizes thus remained faithful to Cubism all his life, not as a style but as an original impulse.
positive,Cubism has not, despite his own efforts and those of Robert Delaunay in the 1930s, given rise to a great, popular, decorative art.
positive,But Gleizes was also fond of remarking that nothing resembles a building site so much as a demolition site.
positive,Cubism expressed both the demolition of the old 'cast of mind' and the construction of the new.
negative,It is difficult to see a 'new cast of mind' in the present state of modern painting, or indeed any indication of anything that might have a long-term future ahead of it.
negative,But it is equally difficult to believe that the present state of affairs is definitive.
positive,If Gleizes is right then we are still in the period of demolition.
positive,We barely know what the word means (and this is logical if, as Gleizes affirms, that meaning is undergoing a process of radical change).
negative,The day on which we begin to feel this as a serious problem that needs to be addressed will be the day on which Gleizes' importance begins to be appreciated.
positive,Association des Amis d'Albert Gleizes February 1995 The Epic From immobile form to mobile form CHALLENGING THE RENAISSANCE The first manifestations of Cubism took people by surprise because their minds, ill-adapted as they are to the idea of movement, are never able, on the basis of what is in front of them, to envisage what is to come.
negative,Already for quite some time, the idea ofform that had been adopted at the time of the Renaissance had become more than doubtful.
positive,During the nineteenth century, Christian art had been rediscovered by a team of erudite and enterprising scholars.
positive,The appearance of such a strong and respectable ally in opposition to the absolutes of Latin culture was, at the very least, interesting; but, most important, it was bound to evoke an idea ofform quite different from the one which this official, Latin authority supported.
