positive,There is an important wartime correspondence between them, Gleizes painted Cocteau's portrait, and they planned together a production of Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream to be performed by the Circus Medrano in Paris.
positive,Gleizes in his Souvenirs speaks affectionately of Cocteau but on his return to Paris in 1919 he was deeply upset by the nature of the influence Cocteau was exerting in artistic circles and broke off all contact with him, to the extent of insisting that if his wife, Cocteau's childhood friend, did not also break off contact he would leave her.
positive,This was the more remarkable since at that time friendship with Cocteau - and Cocteau certainly wanted to remain friends with Gleizes - was an important means of achieving social and commercial success.
negative,Back 15 For Gleizes, the problem had been posed long before his engagement with Cubism.
positive,In 1906, he had been one of the founders of the Abbaye de Creteil, a community of artists trying to secure their independence from the pressures of economic necessity.
neutral,In 1927, Gleizes repeated this experiment with 'Moly Sabata', in Sablons, in the Rhone Valley.
positive,Back 16 Gleizes had only recently had some experience of this, when Leonce Rosenberg, whom Gleizes found the most sympathetic of the art dealers, offered to push up the price of his pre-war painting La Chasse, which was coming up for auction.
neutral,Gleizes replied that he rather wanted to buy it himself and therefore wanted the price to be as low as possible.
neutral,Back 17 The exclusion of the Dadaists from this exhibition provided the occasion for the quarrel with Gleizes referred to in fn 9 above.
positive,Back 18 In the 1920s Gleizes uses the words metaphysical and physical to signify more or less the meaning that he would later want to convey with the words subjective and objective.
positive,As far as painting is concerned, the appearances of the external world are metaphysical because they do not correspond to the order of reality of the painting itself.
positive,As early as Du "Cubisme" (1912), Gleizes has argued that we cannot know the external world, we can only know our 'sensations'.
neutral,At the time of writing the present essay he was in close relations with the mathematician,Charles Henry who, taking this as axiomatic, regarded all scientific research which pretended to describe an external world independent of human sensations as metaphysical.
negative,Which is to say that, as used by Gleizes and by Henry, 'metaphysical' and physical' mean almost the opposite of what they are usually taken to mean.
positive,In the 1930s, Gleizes was to become interested in the thinking of Rene Guenon which claims to be 'metaphysical', using a different understanding of the word.
positive,Gleizes did not in general adopt the word in Guenon's understanding of it but he no longer uses it as he does here, in a derogatory sense.
positive,Back 19 I understand this passage as meaning that the artist's 'sensibility' was no longer on display and, consequently, the artist, in the process of being converted into an artisan doing a job of work according to certain criteria of an objective nature, was no longer obliged to take the attacks that were launched against his work personally'.
positive,Back 20 Gleizes may be thinking of Marcel Duchamp, whom he knew very well.
positive,They had been together in New York, where Duchamp's development had worried him deeply.
positive,Back 21 The hierarchy of esemplastic acts is a main theme of the theoretical Essai de Generalisation which Gleizes intended should accompany the present essay when it was published by the Bauhaus.
positive,Back 22 As Gleizes said in a letter to Robert Pouyaud, written in 1926: 'A table is as concrete as a horse; but the tablemaker starts from principles that can also be found in the structure of the horse.
neutral,The painter who starts from the horse to make an image of it, to reproduce it, has no principle.
positive,I would go so far as to say that he starts from the
