neutral,which brought a blush to the cheeks of the spirit of civilisation.
neutral,After seeing them, and liking them, Cubism was not ashamed to, itself, assume appearances which the world about it considered to be monstrous.
positive,So, for some, it was through the old image-makers of the period before the thirteenth century and, for others, it was through negro sculpture, that their work was able to acquire such a very profoundly human character.
positive,That was where all the researches began - in that transformation of the old way of looking at things.
positive,The Cubists were not the only ones who found those ages that had been denigrated by the academies passionately moving, since this passion is still the distinct, distinguishing characteristic of our whole generation.
positive,We are often unjust in the attitudes we adopt towards the Romantics, but nothing can change the fact that it is because of them that we know something other than what the official teaching, soaked in the slogans of the Renaissance, was capable of giving us.
negative,In its origins it was readily confused with the general tendencies of its generation, but the moment is not far off when it will assume the leadership, when it will go beyond the level of mere appearances and will oblige what is still just an intellectual admiration for past ages to turn into a practical knowledge of principles that cannot be changed.
positive,It will act not just on painters, sculptors and architects, but on the world as a whole at the widest and most general level.
positive,THE PUBLIC SCANDAL OF CUBISM, 1911 It was at the Salon des Independants in Paris in 1911 that, for the first time, the public was confronted with a collection of paintings which still did not have any label attached to them.
positive,I know that, in saying that, I am going against the generally accepted legend but the truth requires that it be said.
negative,I have in front of me a small cutting from an evening newspaper, The Press, on the subject of the 1910 Salon d'Automne.
positive,It gives a good idea of the situation in which the new pictorial tendency, still barely perceptible, found itself: 'The geometrical fallacies of Messrs. Metzinger, Le Fauconnier, and Gleizes'.
neutral,Braque and Picasso only showed in Kahnweiler's gallery and we were unaware of them (3).
positive,Robert Delaunay, Metzinger and Le Fauconnier had been noticed at the Salon des Independants of that same year, 1910, without a label being fixed on them.
positive,Consequently, although much effort has been put into proving the opposite, the word Cubism was not at that time current (4).
positive,Things speeded up in 1911, and the nature and importance of the crisis that painting was entering into began to be seen more clearly.
neutral,Room 41 of the Salon des Independants was a revelation for everyone.
neutral,It struck the imagination as an element which has been disturbed can astonish and produce a feeling of anguish without necessarily being understood.
negative,These canvasses in a dull, muddy grey - did they not hint at a future in which the forms of the present day would be destroyed and replaced by others?
positive,Already people were beginning to argue for the legitimacy of the great masters of the Renaissance, even though they still occupied a position that was far more powerful than that of the newcomers (see, for example, Georges Mourey in Le Journal on the Salon d'Automne of 1911).
positive,Minds that confuse what is at the present time with what is permanent, cannot bring themselves to admit that change is of the very stuff of existence.
negative,The painters were the first to be surprised by the storms they had let loose without intending to, merely because they had hung on the wooden bars that run along the
