neutral,Alexandre Mercereau, the advocate-general Granie, supported them in their writings and in the talks they gave.
negative,The scandal was not as violent in the other European countries as it had been in Paris, but the interest that Cubism aroused was just as great.
positive,Public opinion was excited by the new appearances that were being assumed by painting.
negative,What came back to us at that time, as an echo, from the manifestations to which the public of these other European countries gave themselves up on the faith, good or bad, of the papers (which told the wildest stories, illustrated with portraits or reproductions nearly always arbitrarily re-worked when they hadn't been invented altogether) shows to what extent the imagination can pull masses of individuals out of their daily routine, if only it is moved by something that has life in it.
positive,We are sometimes surprised to think that in Greece, thousands of men could be moved, passionately, by a play of Sophocles.
positive,Cubism has shown that such passion can still be aroused at the present day, if we judge by the lively debates it provoked - debates which, after eighteen years of living evolution, are still far from being at an end.
positive,By the time of the Salon d'Automne which opened in 1911, some new talents had appeared, joining those who had been there at the beginning: Andre Lhote, Marcel Duchamp, Roger de la Fresnaye, Jacques Villon.
positive,And elsewhere, though he did not show with us, there was Juan Gris, the pitiless inquisitor, who was, later, to be one of the first to distinguish the essential elements of what there was in Cubism that was important, still, at this time, hidden by the tenacious persistence of old habits.
positive,None of us, however, were able to get used to the scandal which continued to rage about us.
positive,In those heroic times, what high, disinterested courage was shown by my friends in the struggle!
positive,I cannot bring those moments back to memory without admiring the carefree open-heartedness of their action.
positive,In fact, it is to those painters who were seen at the Independants or at the Salon d'Automne of 1911 that the glory belongs of having planted in the world of humanity a seed that, in the natural process of its growth, would split from top to bottom the generally accepted idea of form.
neutral,THE CONFLICTS OF 1912 It was against these painters - and against them exclusively - that the attacks of the public authorities, provoked by the Parisian press and by pressure from the academies, were aimed.
neutral,The Conseil Municipal de Paris threatened the Salon des Independants, where Cubism had begun, with its thunderbolts.
neutral,Questions were put against the Cubist painters in the Chambre des Deputes.
positive,To defend them and, at the same time, to defend the Salon d'Automne, whose chief administrators were in a state of panic, Maurice Sembat spoke: 'The Salon d'Automne this year [ 1912] has had the glory of becoming an object of scandal, and this glory it owes to the Cubist painters!!!'
positive,That was how Sembat's speech began, and this speech is an important event in modern history.
positive,For the first time in a parliament a question concerning the moral order, free of any material interest, a question of concern to the needs of the spirit, was raised.
positive,For the first time, the legitimacy and superiority of the appearances of unofficial art were openly proclaimed.
negative,What had until then been said only in little groups was now announced from the heights of a national tribunal; and it provoked interruptions from one side and from the other which were, generally, approvals.
neutral,Painting evoked literature; Cubism evoked the memory of Mallarme - the Symbolist poets had become part of the established order of the day (7).
neutral,If such a thing had happened in Greece or in Rome it would have inspired floods of admiration from among our aging humanists.
positive,But, so close to us, it does not seem so extraordinary.
