If, for instance, simple curved lines were to be used in the examples given Increasing
the Number
above instead of straight lines, the sum of the sounds would become three
of Sounds
times as great. Every simple curved line, as was said in the section on
Line, consists of two tensions, which produce a third. Furthermore, if
simple curved lines are replaced by wave-like lines, every bend would
represent a simple curved line with its three tensions, and the sum of the
tensions would accordingly become greater and greater. The relation of
each bend to the edges of the BP would hereby complicate this sum by
1
louder or fainter sounds.
Regularity
The relationship of planes to the BP is a theme in itself. The rules and
regulations given here retain, nevertheless, their full validity and point the
way in which this special theme should be treated.
Thus far, only the square BP has been considered. The remaining right-
Further
BP Forms
angled forms are products of the predominance or preponderance of the
pair of horizontal boundaries or of the vertical. In the first case, cold rest
gets the upper hand; in the second, warm rest; this obviously determines
from the start the basic sound of the BP. Striving upward and stretching
outward are antipodes. The objectivity of the square disappears and is
replaced by a one-sided tension of the whole BP which—more or less
audible—influences all the elements on the BP.
We should not fail to mention the fact that both
of these types are of a
considerably more complex nature than
the square. In the horizontal
format, for example, the upper edge is longer
than the side edges and so
creates more possibilities direction
in the of "freedom" for the elements,
but these are soon suppressed
again by the shortness of the sides. The
contrary is true in vertical
the format. In other words, the boundaries in
these cases are much more
dependent upon each other than they are in
the square.
It gives the impression that the surroundings of the BP partici-
pate
and exert a pressure from the outside. Thus, in the vertical format,
full
play upward is facilitated because the pressure of the surroundings
1
The compositional diagrams included here illustrate such cases. (See appendix.
139