analytical
Painting In reference to examinations, the art of painting, strangely
and
enough, assumes a special position among the various forms of art ex-
Other Art
pression. Architecture, for example, by its nature closely bound up with
Expressions
utility, consequently requires from its very start a certain degree of
scientific capacities. Music, which serves no practical use (with the excep-
tion of march and dance music) and which has until now remained
ab-
stract, has long developed its theory; perhaps so far it is only one-sided
but, nevertheless, it is constantly being developed. Thus these two
dia-
metrically opposite forms of art expression have scientific
a basis about
which ro one seems to feel offended.
If in this respect the other art expressions have remained more or less
backward, it is always in the degree of development relative to the
artistic development.
Theory Painting, especially, has advanced with almost fantastic strides during
the
last decades, and it has only recently been freed from practical
meaning
and liberated from the necessity of responding
to the many purposes it
had earlier been forced to serve. It has attained a level which imperiously
demands that an exact scientific examination be made about the pictorial
means and purposes of painting. Without such an investigation, further
advance is impossible—either for the artist or the general public.
It can be assumed with complete certainty that painting was not
In Earlier always
Times
lacking in theory as it is today. The beginner was taught that certain
scientific knowledge formerly existed, not merely covering purely technical
composition
matters, but certain principles of as well, and that to some
extent, facts concerning the elements, their nature and application were
1
general knowledge to the artists.
With the exception of the purely technical recipes (printing, binding
media, etc.) of which many have been found only within the last twenty
1
For instance: the use in composition of the three primary planes as the basis for the
construction of a picture. The remnants of these principles were used until quite
recently in the art academies, and possibly still are in use today.
18