also a prophet of almost religious significance. The ideal of his art was
conceived even before the utter illusion of the density of matter had been
proved by science, and before the reality of frequencies and invisible
forces had opened the imagination of man to unlimited expectations. The
profound truth of Kandinsky's theories at once impressed those who were
equally capable of feeling esthetic enjoyment through his paintings and
of realizing the Importance of Kandinsky's mission at its advent.
Since photography and motion pictures today record all events, situations,
or persons for practical or sentimental need, the skill of modern man has
been freed from reproduction by hand, thus enabling him to cultivate a
higher stage in art expression by following his creative esthetic urge. His
eyes have become sensitized to realize the rhythmic life in the span of the
in-between—the life that is the essence of a non-objective masterpiece.
Such a masterpiece, due to those spiritual qualities, becomes everlastingly
appealing in its endless combinations of colours, forms, and contrasts, In
their relations to each other or to space. It can be easily observed that
each colour and design motive is organized in itself, while constantly re-
acting and playing with its form or colour opponent. Thus it brings restful
enjoyment, which is as peacefully uplifting the observance
as of the infinity
of the starlit sky. Out pleasures emerges realization of
of such the the
rhythm which lies in following
the in-between, realized by the motives and
discovering
the meeting points of lines and forms, in contrast to a calm,
harmonious
unit.
Contrary to the static form-ideal
of painting which prevailed in the past
millennium, where the
subjective object was immediately perceived as a
whole and graphically directed object-
recorded by the intellect, always
ively earthward, moving
the form-ideal of today sets into motion the eye
in any desired cannot
direction of the rhythmic non-objective creation. This
be mentally recorded or memorized like objective impressions because it
points heavenward, as an expression of infinity. If to some the harmony of
order and beauty of these non-objective creative paintings is not imme-
diately obvious or appealing, it gradually becomes evident to anyone
permanently exposed to their increasingly realized influence. Through this,
the onlooker subconsciously enfolds his personal advance towards exacti-
11