In 1910, Kandinsky wrote his famous book "On the Spiritual in Art,"
a
theoretical treatise, in which he established the philosophical basis of
non-
objective painting. The following year he finished and exhibited his first
entirely non-objective canvases, which attracted world-wide attention
and
excited controversies of tremendous import. Between 1914
and 1921 Kan-
dinsky lived in Russia where he acted in several official
artistic capacities.
In 1919 he became the director of the Museum of Pictorial Culture in
Moscow and, as such, founded the Institute of Artistic Culture for which
he wrote the recently published Culture Plan. In 1920, he was named pro-
fessor of art at the University of Moscow. In 1920, also in Moscow, he
created the Academy of Artistic Science, of which he became vice-
president.
Later that year, Kandinsky returned to Berlin where, at the Wallerstein
Gallery, he exhibited his first open-spaced canvases, in which one sees
his turning from lyrical organizations of effervescent
colour expressions to a
more dramatic clarification of definite form and space precision. With
infinite care he studied the dimension of open-space in contrast to colour
value and form extension, as well as line direction and the intensity of the
point. After 1923 he perfected, with scientific precision, his marvelous
presentation of colour technique. He also taught at the well-known Bau-
haus, first established in Weimar, later in Dessau, until 1933, when preju-
diced authorities ordered its closing. Kandinsky then left for Berlin, but
finally, the next year, settled in Paris, where he continued his work until
his death, December 1944.
13,
As his last paintings prove, with intense concentration, Kandinsky increas-
ingly refined the precision balance given
of in the space of the painting,
as the innermost powerful essence
of its rhythmic tension. Like every
creative painter
of our day, he ceased to be satisfied with representation,
however artistic, but felt more and more the desire to express his inner
life in a cosmic organization. He was, however, the first to proclaim this
principle; and when he realized that the musician's incorporeal freedom
from earthly inspiration for his art was also the privilege of the painter,
he became one of the most violently attacked pioneers. He courageously
maintained this conviction, in spite of the all-powerful objective tradition
8