is the "direction," which is also determined by the "movement." The ele-
ments of painting are material results of movement in the form:
1. of the tension, and
2. of the direction.
This division creates, furthermore, a basis for the differentiation of various
kinds of elements as, for example, point and line. Of these, the point
carries only one tension within it and it can have no direction;
the line
definitely shares in both the tension and direction.
the If, for instance,
the straight line were to be investigated from the standpoint of its tension
alone, it would be impossible to distinguish a horizontal line from a verti-
cal. The above holds equally true in connection with colour analysis, since
some colours are to be distinguished from others only in the directions of
1
their tensions.
We note that there are three typical kinds of straight lines of which other
straight lines are only variations.
form of straight horizontal.
I. The simplest the line is the In the human
imagination, this corresponds to the line or the plane upon which the
human being stands or moves. The horizontal line is also a cold sup-
porting base which can be extended on the level in various directions.
Coldness and flatness are the basic sounds of this line, and it can be
designated as the most concise form of the potentiality for end-
less cold movement.
"•
See, for example, the characterization of yellow and blue in my book "liber das
Geistige in der Kunst," R. Piper & Co., Yerlag, Munich, 3rd Edition, I9I2, 73,
pp.
77 and Plates I and II. [This book has recently been translated into English and
76,
reissued under the title "On the Spiritual Art" the Solomon Guggenheim
in by R.
Foundation, New York City, this particular reference will be found
and on pages 60
to 64, inch] A cautious use of these concepts is especially important in the analysis
of "form in drawing," since it is right here that direction plays a definite role. It is to
be observed with regret that painting is least well provided with an exact terminology
which renders scientific work exceedingly difficult and sometimes quite impossible. One
necessary
must start here from the beginning and a dictionary of terminology is a
in Moscow I9I9 but has achieved
preliminary. An attempt at this was made about
58 no results. Perhaps the time was not then ripe.