—
Colour: The acentric free straight lines are the first straight lines to possess a
Yellow and
special capacity—a capacity which they share to a degree with the
Blue
"colourful" colours, and which distinguishes the latter from black and
white. Yellow and blue, especially, carry within
them different tensions
tensions of advancing and retreating. The purely schematic straight lines
(horizontals, verticals and diagonals—but especially the first two), develop
their tensions on the plane and exhibit no inclination to leave it. In the
case of free straight lines and, above all, the acentric ones, we observe
a loose relationship to the plane: they are less completely fused with
the plane and seem to pierce it occasionally. These lines are farthest
removed from the point, which claws itself into the plane, since they
especially have abandoned the element of rest.
In case of bounded plane, this
the the loose relationship is possible only
outside
when the line lies freely on it; that is, when it does not touch its
boundaries. This will be discussed at greater length in the chapter "Basic
Plane."
At all events, there is a certain relationship in the tensions of the acentric
free straight lines and those of the "colourful" colours. The natural connec-
tions between the "graphic" and the "pictorial" elements, which we can
to some extent recognize today, are of immeasurable importance to the
future theory of composition. Only in this direction, can planned exact ex-
periments in construction
be made in our laboratory work, and the mis-
chievous fog in which we are today condemned to wander, will certainly
become more transparent and less suffocating.
Black When the typical straight lines, principally the horizontals and verticals,
and
White
are tested for their colour characteristics, a comparison with black and
white forces itself, logically enough, upon our attention. Just as both of
these colours (which until recently were called "non-colours" and which
today are somewhat ineptly termed "colourless" colours) are silent colours,
both of the above mentioned straight lines are, in the same manner, silent
lines. Here and there, the sound is reduced a minimum: silence or,
to
62 rather, scarcely audible whispering and stillness. Black and white lie outside