controlled by laws of counterpoint, make his artistic message as endlessly
alive and original as nature itself.
artistic expression of our day no longer responds to materialistic ob-
The
it has advanced to become spiritually creative. No longer must
jectives;
a lemon to paint the beauty of an intense yellow; or
the painter display
contrast with lovely blue; nor must he anywhere at
search the sky to it a
permitted paint. will, can
all hunt for earthly motives before he is to At he
now organize forms and colours into the virgin-white, esthetic purity of
a given space, which is his canvas; so as to enrich its beauty without dis-
turbing its loveliness, he is now free to follow a higher evolution beyond
the pretense of make-believe. Unknown to some painters who miss their
epoch and are still shackled by the caveman's out-dated urge for repro-
of art has become infinite, through the painter's
duction, the freedom
and esthetic expressions which are spiritually
vision of new possibilities
painter have
conceived and of superior value. The eyes of the been liber-
ated to vision, freed from the bonds of imitation and the pretense of a
perspective make-believe, of a faked third dimension, to a visionary
reality. The non-objective artist is a practical educator, the bearer of joy
and a creator who deals with eternity. His painting gradually elevates the
onlooker, through pleasurable realization of esthetic refinement, to har-
satisfying the soul's need for
mony containing order, which proves to
perfect peace.
The prophetic, immaterialistic ideal of the modern painter proclaims the
coming era of spirituality. His reaching into the absolute emphasized the
subconscious desire of all men to such advance. The increase in material
of life, which man has accomplished by harnessing invisible forces of
ease
waves, rays, or atoms, has freed him now and has given him
electrical
increase his cultural and esthetic
time with which to direct his aims, to
expression, and to contact the eternal realities of permanence, so close to
all and yet so utterly ignored by most.
Non-objective painting helps to free the human soul from materialistic
contemplation and brings joy through the perfection of esthetic enlight-
enment. Therefore, Kandinsky was not only a painter and scientist, but
10