—
able
Shock Sometimes an unusual shock is to jolt us out of such a lifeless state
however, the thorough
into vigorous feeling. Frequently, most shaking
fails to revitalize the deadly condition. The shocks which come from with-
out (sickness, accident, sorrow, war, revolution) wrench us violently out of
the circle of our customary habits for a shorter or a longer time, but such
shocks are, as a rule, looked upon as a more or less violent "injustice."
Therefore, the desire to re-establish as soon as possible the traditional
habits, temporarily abandoned, outweighs all other feelings.
From Disturbances originating from within are of a different character; they
Within
being
are brought about by the human himself and, therefore, find in him
their appropriate foundation. This foundation is not the capacity merely
to observe the "street" through the fragile—although hard and firm
"pane of glass," but consists of being able to enter the street. There, the
receptive eye and the receptive ear transform the slightest vibrations into
impressive experiences. Voices arise from all sides, and the world rings.
Just as an explorer penetrates deeply into new and unknown lands, one
makes discoveries in the everyday life, and the erstwhile mute surroundings
begin to speak a language which becomes increasingly clear. In this way,
the lifeless signs turn into living symbols and the dead is revived.
Naturally, the new science of art can only develop when the signs become
symbols and receptive and ear open way from silence to
the eye the
speech. Let him who is unable to accomplish this, leave both the "theo-
retic" and the "practical" in art alone; far from building a bridge, those
efforts spent on art will, rather, enlarge the present day chasm between
mankind and art. It is these very people who are today intent upon
placing a period after the word "art."
As we gradually tear the point out of its restricted sphere of customary
Release
influence, its inner attributes—which were silent until now-—make them-
26 selves heard more and more.