altered. Nevertheless, this would not mean that painting as a whole would
become superfluous: even the abstract elements of painting would retain
their pictorial colouration as do the elements of music.
Lack of joyous mobility on and off the surface, reduces the time limit
Time of
perception to a minimum; the element of time in point
the is almost com-
pletely eliminated which, in special cases
of composition, makes the point
inevitable. Its use here corresponds to the sharp blow on a kettle-drum
or a triangle in music, or to the short taps of the woodpecker in nature.
The Point Even at present there exist some art theorists who look askance at the use
in Painting
of point or line in painting. They would like to see the many venerable
barriers preserved, which until recently isolated with apparent finality two
fields of art from each other painting and graphics.
—that of that of the
1
At all events, there exists no inner reason for this separation.
Time, in painting, is a question in itself and is very complex. Here as well
Time in
Painting
2
the barrier began to dwindle several years ago. This barrier hitherto had
divided two fields of art—that of painting from that of music.
The apparently clear and justifiable division:
painting (plane)
—space
music—time
1 The reason for this division is an external one and it would be more logical, if a more
exact definition is necessary, to divide painting into hand-painting and print-painting,
correctly point to the technical origin of art works. The term
which would quite
"graphic" has lost its clarity— is not uncommon for watercolour to be classified with
it
the graphics which is sufficient proof of the confusion in our thoughtless, habitual use
of conceptions. A watercolour painted by hand Is a work of painting or, to designate
it more exactly, of hand-painting. This same watercolour, reproduced exactly by means
of lithography, still is a work of painting but, to be precise, of print-painting. To make
a real distinction, one could add the terms "black-and-white" or "colour" painting.
2
The "All-Russian Academy of the Science of Art" in Moscow, for example, took some
steps in this direction in the year 1920.
34